my pursuers knew that the end was close. Around me on every side was
desolation; there was not a roof or light, as far as I could see. Far
off to the right rose some dark mass, but what it was I knew not. For
a moment I paused to think what I should do, not for more, for my
pursuers were drawing closer. Then my mind was made up. I slipped down
the bank and took to the water. I struck out straight ahead so as to
gain the current by clearing the backwater of the island, for such I
presume it was, when I had passed into the stream. I waited till a
cloud came driving across the moon and leaving all in darkness. Then I
took off my hat and laid it softly on the water floating with the
stream, and a second after dived to the right and struck out under
water with all my might. I was, I suppose, half a minute under water,
and when I rose came up as softly as I could, and turning, looked
back. There went my light brown hat floating merrily away. Close
behind it came a rickety old boat, driven furiously by a pair of oars.
The moon was still partly obscured by the drifting clouds, but in the
partial light I could see a man in the bows holding aloft ready to
strike what appeared to me to be that same dreadful pole-axe which I
had before escaped. As I looked the boat drew closer, closer, and the
man struck savagely. The hat disappeared. The man fell forward, almost
out of the boat. His comrades dragged him in but without the axe, and
then as I turned with all my energies bent on reaching the further
bank, I heard the fierce whirr of the muttered 'Sacre!' which marked
the anger of my baffled pursuers.

That was the first sound I had heard from human lips during all this
dreadful chase, and full as it was of menace and danger to me it was a
welcome sound for it broke that awful silence which shrouded and
appalled me. It was as though an overt sign that my opponents were men
and not ghosts, and that with them I had, at least, the chance of a
man, though but one against many.

But now that the spell of silence was broken the sounds came thick and
fast. From boat to shore and back from shore to boat came quick
question and answer, all in the fiercest whispers. I looked back--a
fatal thing to do--for in the instant someone caught sight of my face,
which showed white on the dark water, and shouted. Hands pointed to
me, and in a moment or two the boat was under weigh, and following
hard after me. I had but a little way to go, but quicker and quicker
came the boat after me. A few more strokes and I would be on the
shore, but I felt the oncoming of the boat, and expected each second
to feel the crash of an oar or other weapon on my head. Had I not seen
that dreadful axe disappear in the water I do not think that I could
have won the shore. I heard the muttered curses of those not rowing
and the laboured breath of the rowers. With one supreme effort for
life or liberty I touched the bank and sprang up it. There was not a
single second to spare, for hard behind me the boat grounded and
several dark forms sprang after me. I gained the top of the dyke, and
keeping to the left ran on again. The boat put off and followed down
the stream. Seeing this I feared danger in this direction, and quickly
turning, ran down the dyke on the other side, and after passing a
short stretch of marshy ground gained a wild, open flat country and
sped on.

Still behind me came on my relentless pursuers. Far away, below me, I
saw the same dark mass as before, but now grown closer and greater. My
heart gave a great thrill of delight, for I knew that it must be the
fortress of Bicêtre, and with new courage I ran on. I had heard that
between each and all of the protecting forts of Paris there are
strategic ways, deep sunk roads where soldiers marching should be
sheltered from an enemy. I knew that if I could gain this road I would
be safe, but in the darkness I could not see any sign of it, so, in
blind hope of striking it, I ran on.

Presently I came to the edge of a deep cut, and found that down below
me ran a road guarded on each side by a ditch of water fenced on
either side by a straight, high wall.

Getting fainter and dizzier, I ran on; the ground got more
broken--more and more still, till I staggered and fell, and rose
again, and ran on in the blind anguish of the hunted. Again the
thought of Alice nerved me. I would not be lost and wreck her life: I
would fight and struggle for life to the bitter end. With a great
effort I caught the top of the wall. As, scrambling like a catamount,
I drew myself up, I actually felt a hand touch the sole of my foot. I
was now on a sort of causeway, and before me I saw a dim light. Blind
and dizzy, I ran on, staggered, and fell, rising, covered with dust
and blood.

'Halt la!'

The words sounded like a voice from heaven. A blaze of light seemed to
enwrap me, and I shouted with joy.

'Qui va la?' The rattle of musketry, the flash of steel before my
eyes. Instinctively I stopped, though close behind me came a rush of
my pursuers.

Another word or two, and out from a gateway poured, as it seemed to
me, a tide of red and blue, as the guard turned out. All around seemed
blazing with light, and the flash of steel, the clink and rattle of
arms, and the loud, harsh voices of command. As I fell forward,
utterly exhausted, a soldier caught me. I looked back in dreadful
expectation, and saw the mass of dark forms disappearing into the
night. Then I must have fainted. When I recovered my senses I was in
the guard room. They gave me brandy, and after a while I was able to
tell them something of what had passed. Then a commissary of police
appeared, apparently out of the empty air, as is the way of the
Parisian police officer. He listened attentively, and then had a
moment's consultation with the officer in command. Apparently they
were agreed, for they asked me if I were ready now to come with them.

'Where to?' I asked, rising to go.

'Back to the dust heaps. We shall, perhaps, catch them yet!'

'I shall try!' said I.

He eyed me for a moment keenly, and said suddenly:

'Would you like to wait a while or till tomorrow, young Englishman?'
This touched me to the quick, as, perhaps, he intended, and I jumped
to my feet.

'Come now!' I said; 'now! now! An Englishman is always ready for his
duty!'

The commissary was a good fellow, as well as a shrewd one; he slapped
my shoulder kindly. 'Brave garçon!' he said. 'Forgive me, but I knew
what would do you most good. The guard is ready. Come!'

And so, passing right through the guard room, and through a long
vaulted passage, we were out into the night. A few of the men in front
had powerful lanterns. Through courtyards and down a sloping way we
passed out through a low archway to a sunken road, the same that I had
seen in my flight. The order was given to get at the double, and with
a quick, springing stride, half run, half walk, the soldiers went
swiftly along. I felt my strength renewed again--such is the
difference between hunter and hunted. A very short distance took us to
a low-lying pontoon bridge across the stream, and evidently very
little higher up than I had struck it. Some effort had evidently been
made to damage it, for the ropes had all been cut, and one of the
chains had been broken. I heard the officer say to the commissary:

'We are just in time! A few more minutes, and they would have
destroyed the bridge. Forward, quicker still!' and on we went. Again
we reached a pontoon on the winding stream; as we came up we heard the
hollow boom of the metal drums as the efforts to destroy the bridge
was again renewed. A word of command was given, and several men raised
their rifles.

'Fire!' A volley rang out. There was a muffled cry, and the dark forms
dispersed. But the evil was done, and we saw the far end of the
pontoon swing into the stream. This was a serious delay, and it was
nearly an hour before we had renewed ropes and restored the bridge
sufficiently to allow us to cross.

We renewed the chase. Quicker, quicker we went towards the dust
heaps.

After a time we came to a place that I knew. There were the remains of
a fire--a few smouldering wood ashes still cast a red glow, but the
bulk of the ashes were cold. I knew the site of the hut and the hill
behind it up which I had rushed, and in the flickering glow the eyes
of the rats still shone with a sort of phosphorescence. The commissary
spoke a word to the officer, and he cried:

'Halt!'

The soldiers were ordered to spread around and watch, and then we
commenced to examine the ruins. The commissary himself began to lift
away the charred boards and rubbish. These the soldiers took and piled
together. Presently he started back, then bent down and rising
beckoned me.

'See!' he said.

It was a gruesome sight. There lay a skeleton face downwards, a woman
by the lines--an old woman by the coarse fibre of the bone. Between
the ribs rose a long spike-like dagger made from a butcher's
sharpening knife, its keen point buried in the spine.

'You will observe,' said the commissary to the officer and to me as he
took out his note book, 'that the woman must have fallen on her
dagger. The rats are many here--see their eyes glistening among that
heap of bones--and you will also notice'--I shuddered as he placed his
hand on the skeleton--'that but little time was lost by them, for the
bones are scarcely cold!'

There was no other sign of any one near, living or dead; and so
deploying again into line the soldiers passed on. Presently we came to
the hut made of the old wardrobe. We approached. In five of the six
compartments was an old man sleeping--sleeping so soundly that even
the glare of the lanterns did not wake them. Old and grim and grizzled
they looked, with their gaunt, wrinkled, bronzed faces and their white
moustaches.

The officer called out harshly and loudly a word of command, and in an
instant each one of them was on his feet before us and standing at
'attention!'

'What do you here?'

'We sleep,' was the answer.

'Where are the other chiffoniers?' asked the commissary.

'Gone to work.'

'And you?'

'We are on guard!'

'Peste!' laughed the officer grimly, as he looked at the old men one
after the other in the face and added with cool deliberate cruelty:
'Asleep on duty! Is this the manner of the Old Guard? No wonder, then,
a Waterloo!'

By the gleam of the lantern I saw the grim old faces grow deadly pale,
and almost shuddered at the look in the eyes of the old men as the
laugh of the soldiers echoed the grim pleasantry of the officer.

I felt in that moment that I was in some measure avenged.

For a moment they looked as if they would throw themselves on the
taunter, but years of their life had schooled them and they remained
still.

'You are but five,' said the commissary; 'where is the sixth?' The
answer came with a grim chuckle.

'He is there!' and the speaker pointed to the bottom of the wardrobe.
'He died last night. You won't find much of him. The burial of the
rats is quick!'

The commissary stooped and looked in. Then he turned to the officer
and said calmly:

'We may as well go back. No trace here now; nothing to prove that man
was the one wounded by your soldiers' bullets! Probably they murdered
him to cover up the trace. See!' again he stooped and placed his hands
on the skeleton. 'The rats work quickly and they are many. These bones
are warm!'

I shuddered, and so did many more of those around me.

'Form!' said the officer, and so in marching order, with the lanterns
swinging in front and the manacled veterans in the midst, with steady
tramp we took ourselves out of the dustheaps and turned backward to
the fortress of Bicêtre.

       *       *       *       *       *

My year of probation has long since ended, and Alice is my wife. But
when I look back upon that trying twelvemonth one of the most vivid
incidents that memory recalls is that associated with my visit to the
City of Dust.




A Dream of Red Hands


The first opinion given to me regarding Jacob Settle was a simple
descriptive statement, 'He's a down-in-the-mouth chap': but I found
that it embodied the thoughts and ideas of all his fellow-workmen.
There was in the phrase a certain easy tolerance, an absence of
positive feeling of any kind, rather than any complete opinion, which
marked pretty accurately the man's place in public esteem. Still,
there was some dissimilarity between this and his appearance which
unconsciously set me thinking, and by degrees, as I saw more of the
place and the workmen, I came to have a special interest in him. He
was, I found, for ever doing kindnesses, not involving money expenses
beyond his humble means, but in the manifold ways of forethought and
forbearance and self-repression which are of the truer charities of
life. Women and children trusted him implicitly, though, strangely
enough, he rather shunned them, except when anyone was sick, and then
he made his appearance to help if he could, timidly and awkwardly. He
led a very solitary life, keeping house by himself in a tiny cottage,
or rather hut, of one room, far on the edge of the moorland. His
existence seemed so sad and solitary that I wished to cheer it up, and
for the purpose took the occasion when we had both been sitting up
with a child, injured by me through accident, to offer to lend him
books. He gladly accepted, and as we parted in the grey of the dawn I
felt that something of mutual confidence had been established between
us.

The books were always most carefully and punctually returned, and in
time Jacob Settle and I became quite friends. Once or twice as I
crossed the moorland on Sundays I looked in on him; but on such
occasions he was shy and ill at ease so that I felt diffident about
calling to see him. He would never under any circumstances come into
my own lodgings.

One Sunday afternoon, I was coming back from a long walk beyond the
moor, and as I passed Settle's cottage stopped at the door to say 'How
do you do?' to him. As the door was shut, I thought that he was out,
and merely knocked for form's sake, or through habit, not expecting to
get any answer. To my surprise, I heard a feeble voice from within,
though what was said I could not hear. I entered at once, and found
Jacob lying half-dressed upon his bed. He was as pale as death, and
the sweat was simply rolling off his face. His hands were
unconsciously gripping the bedclothes as a drowning man holds on to
whatever he may grasp. As I came in he half arose, with a wild, hunted
look in his eyes, which were wide open and staring, as though
something of horror had come before him; but when he recognised me he
sank back on the couch with a smothered sob of relief and closed his
eyes. I stood by him for a while, quite a minute or two, while he
gasped. Then he opened his eyes and looked at me, but with such a
despairing, woeful expression that, as I am a living man, I would have
rather seen that frozen look of horror. I sat down beside him and
asked after his health. For a while he would not answer me except to
say that he was not ill; but then, after scrutinising me closely, he
half arose on his elbow and said:

'I thank you kindly, sir, but I'm simply telling you the truth. I am
not ill, as men call it, though God knows whether there be not worse
sicknesses than doctors know of. I'll tell you, as you are so kind,
but I trust that you won't even mention such a thing to a living soul,
for it might work me more and greater woe. I am suffering from a bad
dream.'

'A bad dream!' I said, hoping to cheer him; 'but dreams pass away with
the light--even with waking.' There I stopped, for before he spoke I
saw the answer in his desolate look round the little place.

'No! no! that's all well for people that live in comfort and with
those they love around them. It is a thousand times worse for those
who live alone and have to do so. What cheer is there for me, waking
here in the silence of the night, with the wide moor around me full of
voices and full of faces that make my waking a worse dream than my
sleep? Ah, young sir, you have no past that can send its legions to
people the darkness and the empty space, and I pray the good God that
you may never have!' As he spoke, there was such an almost
irresistible gravity of conviction in his manner that I abandoned my
remonstrance about his solitary life. I felt that I was in the
presence of some secret influence which I could not fathom. To my
relief, for I knew not what to say, he went on:

'Two nights past have I dreamed it. It was hard enough the first
night, but I came through it. Last night the expectation was in itself
almost worse than the dream--until the dream came, and then it swept
away every remembrance of lesser pain. I stayed awake till just
before the dawn, and then it came again, and ever since I have been in
such an agony as I am sure the dying feel, and with it all the dread
of tonight.' Before he had got to the end of the sentence my mind was
made up, and I felt that I could speak to him more cheerfully.

'Try and get to sleep early tonight--in fact, before the evening has
passed away. The sleep will refresh you, and I promise you there will
not be any bad dreams after tonight.' He shook his head hopelessly, so
I sat a little longer and then left him.

When I got home I made my arrangements for the night, for I had made
up my mind to share Jacob Settle's lonely vigil in his cottage on the
moor. I judged that if he got to sleep before sunset he would wake
well before midnight, and so, just as the bells of the city were
striking eleven, I stood opposite his door armed with a bag, in which
were my supper, an extra large flask, a couple of candles, and a book.
The moonlight was bright, and flooded the whole moor, till it was
almost as light as day; but ever and anon black clouds drove across
the sky, and made a darkness which by comparison seemed almost
tangible. I opened the door softly, and entered without waking Jacob,
who lay asleep with his white face upward. He was still, and again
bathed in sweat. I tried to imagine what visions were passing before
those closed eyes which could bring with them the misery and woe which
were stamped on the face, but fancy failed me, and I waited for the
awakening. It came suddenly, and in a fashion which touched me to the
quick, for the hollow groan that broke from the man's white lips as he
half arose and sank back was manifestly the realisation or completion
of some train of thought which had gone before.

'If this be dreaming,' said I to myself, 'then it must be based on
some very terrible reality. What can have been that unhappy fact that
he spoke of?'

While I thus spoke, he realised that I was with him. It struck me as
strange that he had no period of that doubt as to whether dream or
reality surrounded him which commonly marks an expected environment of
waking men. With a positive cry of joy, he seized my hand and held it
in his two wet, trembling hands, as a frightened child clings on to
someone whom it loves. I tried to soothe him:

'There, there! it is all right. I have come to stay with you tonight,
and together we will try to fight this evil dream.' He let go my hand
suddenly, and sank back on his bed and covered his eyes with his
hands.

'Fight it?--the evil dream! Ah! no, sir, no! No mortal power can fight
that dream, for it comes from God--and is burned in here;' and he beat
upon his forehead. Then he went on:

'It is the same dream, ever the same, and yet it grows in its power to
torture me every time it comes.'

'What is the dream?' I asked, thinking that the speaking of it might
give him some relief, but he shrank away from me, and after a long
pause said:

'No, I had better not tell it. It may not come again.'

There was manifestly something to conceal from me--something that lay
behind the dream, so I answered:

'All right. I hope you have seen the last of it. But if it should come
again, you will tell me, will you not? I ask, not out of curiosity,
but because I think it may relieve you to speak.' He answered with
what I thought was almost an undue amount of solemnity:

'If it comes again, I shall tell you all.'

Then I tried to get his mind away from the subject to more mundane
things, so I produced supper, and made him share it with me, including
the contents of the flask. After a little he braced up, and when I lit
my cigar, having given him another, we smoked a full hour, and talked
of many things. Little by little the comfort of his body stole over
his mind, and I could see sleep laying her gentle hands on his
eyelids. He felt it, too, and told me that now he felt all right, and
I might safely leave him; but I told him that, right or wrong, I was
going to see in the daylight. So I lit my other candle, and began to
read as he fell asleep.

By degrees I got interested in my book, so interested that presently I
was startled by its dropping out of my hands. I looked and saw that
Jacob was still asleep, and I was rejoiced to see that there was on
his face a look of unwonted happiness, while his lips seemed to move
with unspoken words. Then I turned to my work again, and again woke,
but this time to feel chilled to my very marrow by hearing the voice
from the bed beside me:

'Not with those red hands! Never! never!' On looking at him, I found
that he was still asleep. He woke, however, in an instant, and did not
seem surprised to see me; there was again that strange apathy as to
his surroundings. Then I said:

'Settle, tell me your dream. You may speak freely, for I shall hold
your confidence sacred. While we both live I shall never mention what
you may choose to tell me.'

He replied:

'I said I would; but I had better tell you first what goes before the
dream, that you may understand. I was a schoolmaster when I was a very
young man; it was only a parish school in a little village in the
West Country. No need to mention any names. Better not. I was engaged
to be married to a young girl whom I loved and almost reverenced. It
was the old story. While we were waiting for the time when we could
afford to set up house together, another man came along. He was nearly
as young as I was, and handsome, and a gentleman, with all a
gentleman's attractive ways for a woman of our class. He would go
fishing, and she would meet him while I was at my work in school. I
reasoned with her and implored her to give him up. I offered to get
married at once and go away and begin the world in a strange country;
but she would not listen to anything I could say, and I could see that
she was infatuated with him. Then I took it on myself to meet the man
and ask him to deal well with the girl, for I thought he might mean
honestly by her, so that there might be no talk or chance of talk on
the part of others. I went where I should meet him with none by, and
we met!' Here Jacob Settle had to pause, for something seemed to rise
in his throat, and he almost gasped for breath. Then he went on:

'Sir, as God is above us, there was no selfish thought in my heart
that day, I loved my pretty Mabel too well to be content with a part
of her love, and I had thought of my own unhappiness too often not to
have come to realise that, whatever might come to her, my hope was
gone. He was insolent to me--you, sir, who are a gentleman, cannot
know, perhaps, how galling can be the insolence of one who is above
you in station--but I bore with that. I implored him to deal well with
the girl, for what might be only a pastime of an idle hour with him
might be the breaking of her heart. For I never had a thought of her
truth, or that the worst of harm could come to her--it was only the
unhappiness to her heart I feared. But when I asked him when he
intended to marry her his laughter galled me so that I lost my temper
and told him that I would not stand by and see her life made unhappy.
Then he grew angry too, and in his anger said such cruel things of her
that then and there I swore he should not live to do her harm. God
knows how it came about, for in such moments of passion it is hard to
remember the steps from a word to a blow, but I found myself standing
over his dead body, with my hands crimson with the blood that welled
from his torn throat. We were alone and he was a stranger, with none
of his kin to seek for him and murder does not always out--not all at
once. His bones may be whitening still, for all I know, in the pool of
the river where I left him. No one suspected his absence, or why it
was, except my poor Mabel, and she dared not speak. But it was all in
vain, for when I came back again after an absence of months--for I
could not live in the place--I learned that her shame had come and
that she had died in it. Hitherto I had been borne up by the thought
that my ill deed had saved her future, but now, when I learned that I
had been too late, and that my poor love was smirched with that man's
sin, I fled away with the sense of my useless guilt upon me more
heavily than I could bear. Ah! sir, you that have not done such a sin
don't know what it is to carry it with you. You may think that custom
makes it easy to you, but it is not so. It grows and grows with every
hour, till it becomes intolerable, and with it growing, too, the
feeling that you must for ever stand outside Heaven. You don't know
what that means, and I pray God that you never may. Ordinary men, to
whom all things are possible, don't often, if ever, think of Heaven.
It is a name, and nothing more, and they are content to wait and let
things be, but to those who are doomed to be shut out for ever you
cannot think what it means, you cannot guess or measure the terrible
endless longing to see the gates opened, and to be able to join the
white figures within.

'And this brings me to my dream. It seemed that the portal was before
me, with great gates of massive steel with bars of the thickness of a
mast, rising to the very clouds, and so close that between them was
just a glimpse of a crystal grotto, on whose shining walls were
figured many white-clad forms with faces radiant with joy. When I
stood before the gate my heart and my soul were so full of rapture and
longing that I forgot. And there stood at the gate two mighty angels
with sweeping wings, and, oh! so stern of countenance. They held each
in one hand a flaming sword, and in the other the latchet, which moved
to and fro at their lightest touch. Nearer were figures all draped in
black, with heads covered so that only the eyes were seen, and they
handed to each who came white garments such as the angels wear. A low
murmur came that told that all should put on their own robes, and
without soil, or the angels would not pass them in, but would smite
them down with the flaming swords. I was eager to don my own garment,
and hurriedly threw it over me and stepped swiftly to the gate; but it
moved not, and the angels, loosing the latchet, pointed to my dress, I
looked down, and was aghast, for the whole robe was smeared with
blood. My hands were red; they glittered with the blood that dripped
from them as on that day by the river bank. And then the angels raised
their flaming swords to smite me down, and the horror was complete--I
awoke. Again, and again, and again, that awful dream comes to me. I
never learn from the experience, I never remember, but at the
beginning the hope is ever there to make the end more appalling; and I
know that the dream does not come out of the common darkness where the
dreams abide, but that it is sent from God as a punishment! Never,
never shall I be able to pass the gate, for the soil on the angel
garments must ever come from these bloody hands!'

I listened as in a spell as Jacob Settle spoke. There was something so
far away in the tone of his voice--something so dreamy and mystic in
the eyes that looked as if through me at some spirit beyond--something
so lofty in his very diction and in such marked contrast to his
workworn clothes and his poor surroundings that I wondered if the
whole thing were not a dream.

We were both silent for a long time. I kept looking at the man before
me in growing wonderment. Now that his confession had been made, his
soul, which had been crushed to the very earth, seemed to leap back
again to uprightness with some resilient force. I suppose I ought to
have been horrified with his story, but, strange to say, I was not. It
certainly is not pleasant to be made the recipient of the confidence
of a murderer, but this poor fellow seemed to have had, not only so
much provocation, but so much self-denying purpose in his deed of
blood that I did not feel called upon to pass judgment upon him. My
purpose was to comfort, so I spoke out with what calmness I could, for
my heart was beating fast and heavily:

'You need not despair, Jacob Settle. God is very good, and His mercy
is great. Live on and work on in the hope that some day you may feel
that you have atoned for the past.' Here I paused, for I could see
that deep, natural sleep this time, was creeping upon him. 'Go to
sleep,' I said; 'I shall watch with you here and we shall have no more
evil dreams tonight.'

He made an effort to pull himself together, and answered:

'I don't know how to thank you for your goodness to me this night, but
I think you had best leave me now. I'll try and sleep this out; I feel
a weight off my mind since I have told you all. If there's anything of
the man left in me, I must try and fight out life alone.'

'I'll go tonight, as you wish it,' I said; 'but take my advice, and do
not live in such a solitary way. Go among men and women; live among
them. Share their joys and sorrows, and it will help you to forget.
This solitude will make you melancholy mad.'

'I will!' he answered, half unconsciously, for sleep was overmastering
him.

I turned to go, and he looked after me. When I had touched the latch I
dropped it, and, coming back to the bed, held out my hand. He grasped
it with both his as he rose to a sitting posture, and I said my
goodnight, trying to cheer him:

'Heart, man, heart! There is work in the world for you to do, Jacob
Settle. You can wear those white robes yet and pass through that gate
of steel!'

Then I left him.

A week after I found his cottage deserted, and on asking at the works
was told that he had 'gone north', no one exactly knew whither.

Two years afterwards, I was staying for a few days with my friend Dr.
Munro in Glasgow. He was a busy man, and could not spare much time for
going about with me, so I spent my days in excursions to the Trossachs
and Loch Katrine and down the Clyde. On the second last evening of my
stay I came back somewhat later than I had arranged, but found that
my host was late too. The maid told me that he had been sent for to
the hospital--a case of accident at the gas-works, and the dinner was
postponed an hour; so telling her I would stroll down to find her
master and walk back with him, I went out. At the hospital I found him
washing his hands preparatory to starting for home. Casually, I asked
him what his case was.

'Oh, the usual thing! A rotten rope and men's lives of no account. Two
men were working in a gasometer, when the rope that held their
scaffolding broke. It must have occurred just before the dinner hour,
for no one noticed their absence till the men had returned. There was
about seven feet of water in the gasometer, so they had a hard fight
for it, poor fellows. However, one of them was alive, just alive, but
we have had a hard job to pull him through. It seems that he owes his
life to his mate, for I have never heard of greater heroism. They swam
together while their strength lasted, but at the end they were so done
up that even the lights above, and the men slung with ropes, coming
down to help them, could not keep them up. But one of them stood on
the bottom and held up his comrade over his head, and those few
breaths made all the difference between life and death. They were a
shocking sight when they were taken out, for that water is like a
purple dye with the gas and the tar. The man upstairs looked as if he
had been washed in blood. Ugh!'

'And the other?'

'Oh, he's worse still. But he must have been a very noble fellow. That
struggle under the water must have been fearful; one can see that by
the way the blood has been drawn from the extremities. It makes the
idea of the _Stigmata_ possible to look at him. Resolution like this
could, you would think, do anything in the world. Ay! it might almost
unbar the gates of Heaven. Look here, old man, it is not a very
pleasant sight, especially just before dinner, but you are a writer,
and this is an odd case. Here is something you would not like to miss,
for in all human probability you will never see anything like it
again.' While he was speaking he had brought me into the mortuary of
the hospital.

On the bier lay a body covered with a white sheet, which was wrapped
close round it.

'Looks like a chrysalis, don't it? I say, Jack, if there be anything
in the old myth that a soul is typified by a butterfly, well, then the
one that this chrysalis sent forth was a very noble specimen and took
all the sunlight on its wings. See here!' He uncovered the face.
Horrible, indeed, it looked, as though stained with blood. But I knew
him at once, Jacob Settle! My friend pulled the winding sheet further
down.

The hands were crossed on the purple breast as they had been
reverently placed by some tender-hearted person. As I saw them my
heart throbbed with a great exultation, for the memory of his
harrowing dream rushed across my mind. There was no stain now on those
poor, brave hands, for they were blanched white as snow.

And somehow as I looked I felt that the evil dream was all over. That
noble soul had won a way through the gate at last. The white robe had
now no stain from the hands that had put it on.




Crooken Sands


Mr Arthur Fernlee Markam, who took what was known as the Red House
above the Mains of Crooken, was a London merchant, and being
essentially a cockney, thought it necessary when he went for the
summer holidays to Scotland to provide an entire rig-out as a Highland
chieftain, as manifested in chromolithographs and on the music-hall
stage. He had once seen in the Empire the Great Prince--'The Bounder
King'--bring down the house by appearing as 'The MacSlogan of that
Ilk,' and singing the celebrated Scotch song, 'There's naething like
haggis to mak a mon dry!' and he had ever since preserved in his mind
a faithful image of the picturesque and warlike appearance which he
presented. Indeed, if the true inwardness of Mr. Markam's mind on the
subject of his selection of Aberdeenshire as a summer resort were
known, it would be found that in the foreground of the holiday
locality which his fancy painted stalked the many hued figure of the
MacSlogan of that Ilk. However, be this as it may, a very kind
fortune--certainly so far as external beauty was concerned--led him to
the choice of Crooken Bay. It is a lovely spot, between Aberdeen and
Peterhead, just under the rock-bound headland whence the long,
dangerous reefs known as The Spurs run out into the North Sea.
Between this and the 'Mains of Crooken'--a village sheltered by the
northern cliffs--lies the deep bay, backed with a multitude of
bent-grown dunes where the rabbits are to be found in thousands. Thus
at either end of the bay is a rocky promontory, and when the dawn or
the sunset falls on the rocks of red syenite the effect is very
lovely. The bay itself is floored with level sand and the tide runs
far out, leaving a smooth waste of hard sand on which are dotted here
and there the stake nets and bag nets of the salmon fishers. At one
end of the bay there is a little group or cluster of rocks whose heads
are raised something above high water, except when in rough weather
the waves come over them green. At low tide they are exposed down to
sand level; and here is perhaps the only little bit of dangerous sand
on this part of the eastern coast. Between the rocks, which are apart
about some fifty feet, is a small quicksand, which, like the Goodwins,
is dangerous only with the incoming tide. It extends outwards till it
is lost in the sea, and inwards till it fades away in the hard sand of
the upper beach. On the slope of the hill which rises beyond the
dunes, midway between the Spurs and the Port of Crooken, is the Red
House. It rises from the midst of a clump of fir-trees which protect
it on three sides, leaving the whole sea front open. A trim
old-fashioned garden stretches down to the roadway, on crossing which
a grassy path, which can be used for light vehicles, threads a way to
the shore, winding amongst the sand hills.

When the Markam family arrived at the Red House after their thirty-six
hours of pitching on the Aberdeen steamer _Ban Righ_ from Blackwall,
with the subsequent train to Yellon and drive of a dozen miles, they
all agreed that they had never seen a more delightful spot. The
general satisfaction was more marked as at that very time none of the
family were, for several reasons, inclined to find favourable anything
or any place over the Scottish border. Though the family was a large
one, the prosperity of the business allowed them all sorts of personal
luxuries, amongst which was a wide latitude in the way of dress. The
frequency of the Markam girls' new frocks was a source of envy to
their bosom friends and of joy to themselves.

Arthur Fernlee Markam had not taken his family into his confidence
regarding his new costume. He was not quite certain that he should be
free from ridicule, or at least from sarcasm, and as he was sensitive
on the subject, he thought it better to be actually in the suitable
environment before he allowed the full splendour to burst upon them.
He had taken some pains, to insure the completeness of the Highland
costume. For the purpose he had paid many visits to 'The Scotch
All-Wool Tartan Clothing Mart' which had been lately established in
Copthall-court by the Messrs. MacCallum More and Roderick MacDhu. He
had anxious consultations with the head of the firm--MacCallum as he
called himself, resenting any such additions as 'Mr.' or 'Esquire.'
The known stock of buckles, buttons, straps, brooches and ornaments of
all kinds were examined in critical detail; and at last an eagle's
feather of sufficiently magnificent proportions was discovered, and
the equipment was complete. It was only when he saw the finished
costume, with the vivid hues of the tartan seemingly modified into
comparative sobriety by the multitude of silver fittings, the
cairngorm brooches, the philibeg, dirk and sporran that he was fully
and absolutely satisfied with his choice. At first he had thought of
the Royal Stuart dress tartan, but abandoned it on the MacCallum
pointing out that if he should happen to be in the neighbourhood of
Balmoral it might lead to complications. The MacCallum, who, by the
way, spoke with a remarkable cockney accent, suggested other plaids in
turn; but now that the other question of accuracy had been raised, Mr.
Markam foresaw difficulties if he should by chance find himself in the
locality of the clan whose colours he had usurped. The MacCallum at
last undertook to have, at Markam's expense, a special pattern woven
which would not be exactly the same as any existing tartan, though
partaking of the characteristics of many. It was based on the Royal
Stuart, but contained suggestions as to simplicity of pattern from the
Macalister and Ogilvie clans, and as to neutrality of colour from the
clans of Buchanan, Macbeth, Chief of Macintosh and Macleod. When the
specimen had been shown to Markam he had feared somewhat lest it
should strike the eye of his domestic circle as gaudy; but as Roderick
MacDhu fell into perfect ecstasies over its beauty he did not make any
objection to the completion of the piece. He thought, and wisely, that
if a genuine Scotchman like MacDhu liked it, it must be
right--especially as the junior partner was a man very much of his own
build and appearance. When the MacCallum was receiving his
cheque--which, by the way, was a pretty stiff one--he remarked:

'I've taken the liberty of having some more of the stuff woven in case
you or any of your friends should want it.' Markam was gratified, and
told him that he should be only too happy if the beautiful stuff which
they had originated between them should become a favourite, as he had
no doubt it would in time. He might make and sell as much as he would.

Markam tried the dress on in his office one evening after the clerks
had all gone home. He was pleased, though a little frightened, at the
result. The MacCallum had done his work thoroughly, and there was
nothing omitted that could add to the martial dignity of the wearer.

'I shall not, of course, take the claymore and the pistols with me on
ordinary occasions,' said Markam to himself as he began to undress. He
determined that he would wear the dress for the first time on landing
in Scotland, and accordingly on the morning when the _Ban Righ_ was
hanging off the Girdle Ness lighthouse, waiting for the tide to enter
the port of Aberdeen, he emerged from his cabin in all the gaudy
splendour of his new costume. The first comment he heard was from one
of his own sons, who did not recognise him at first.

'Here's a guy! Great Scott! It's the governor!' And the boy fled
forthwith and tried to bury his laughter under a cushion in the
saloon. Markam was a good sailor and had not suffered from the
pitching of the boat, so that his naturally rubicund face was even
more rosy by the conscious blush which suffused his cheeks when he had
found himself at once the cynosure of all eyes. He could have wished
that he had not been so bold for he knew from the cold that there was
a big bare spot under one side of his jauntily worn Glengarry cap.
However, he faced the group of strangers boldly. He was not,
outwardly, upset even when some of the comments reached his ears.

'He's off his bloomin' chump,' said a cockney in a suit of exaggerated
plaid.

'There's flies on him,' said a tall thin Yankee, pale with
sea-sickness, who was on his way to take up his residence for a time
as close as he could get to the gates of Balmoral.

'Happy thought! Let us fill our mulls; now's the chance!' said a
young Oxford man on his way home to Inverness. But presently Mr.
Markam heard the voice of his eldest daughter.

'Where is he? Where is he?' and she came tearing along the deck with
her hat blowing behind her. Her face showed signs of agitation, for
her mother had just been telling her of her father's condition; but
when she saw him she instantly burst into laughter so violent that it
ended in a fit of hysterics. Something of the same kind happened to
each of the other children. When they had all had their turn Mr.
Markam went to his cabin and sent his wife's maid to tell each member
of the family that he wanted to see them at once. They all made their
appearance, suppressing their feelings as well as they could. He said
to them very quietly:

'My dears, don't I provide you all with ample allowances?'

'Yes, father!' they all answered gravely, 'no one could be more
generous!'

'Don't I let you dress as you please?'

'Yes, father!'--this a little sheepishly.

'Then, my dears, don't you think it would be nicer and kinder of you
not to try and make me feel uncomfortable, even if I do assume a dress
which is ridiculous in your eyes, though quite common enough in the
country where we are about to sojourn?' There was no answer except
that which appeared in their hanging heads. He was a good father and
they all knew it. He was quite satisfied and went on:

'There, now, run away and enjoy yourselves! We shan't have another
word about it.' Then he went on deck again and stood bravely the fire
of ridicule which he recognised around him, though nothing more was
said within his hearing.

The astonishment and the amusement which his get-up occasioned on the
_Ban Righ_ was, however, nothing to that which it created in Aberdeen.
The boys and loafers, and women with babies, who waited at the landing
shed, followed _en masse_ as the Markam party took their way to the
railway station; even the porters with their old-fashioned knots and
their new-fashioned barrows, who await the traveller at the foot of
the gang-plank, followed in wondering delight. Fortunately the
Peterhead train was just about to start, so that the martyrdom was not
unnecessarily prolonged. In the carriage the glorious Highland costume
was unseen, and as there were but few persons at the station at
Yellon, all went well there. When, however, the carriage drew near the
Mains of Crooken and the fisher folk had run to their doors to see who
it was that was passing, the excitement exceeded all bounds. The
children with one impulse waved their bonnets and ran shouting behind
the carriage; the men forsook their nets and their baiting and
followed; the women clutched their babies, and followed also. The
horses were tired after their long journey to Yellon and back, and the
hill was steep, so that there was ample time for the crowd to gather
and even to pass on ahead.

Mrs. Markam and the elder girls would have liked to make some protest
or to do something to relieve their feelings of chagrin at the
ridicule which they saw on all faces, but there was a look of fixed
determination on the face of the seeming Highlander which awed them a
little, and they were silent. It might have been that the eagle's
feather, even when arising above the bald head, the cairngorm brooch
even on the fat shoulder, and the claymore, dirk and pistols, even
when belted round the extensive paunch and protruding from the
stocking on the sturdy calf, fulfilled their existence as symbols of
martial and terrifying import! When the party arrived at the gate of
the Red House there awaited them a crowd of Crooken inhabitants,
hatless and respectfully silent; the remainder of the population was
painfully toiling up the hill. The silence was broken by only one
sound, that of a man with a deep voice.

'Man! but he's forgotten the pipes!'

The servants had arrived some days before, and all things were in
readiness. In the glow consequent on a good lunch after a hard journey
all the disagreeables of travel and all the chagrin consequent on the
adoption of the obnoxious costume were forgotten.

That afternoon Markam, still clad in full array, walked through the
Mains of Crooken. He was all alone, for, strange to say, his wife and
both daughters had sick headaches, and were, as he was told, lying
down to rest after the fatigue of the journey. His eldest son, who
claimed to be a young man, had gone out by himself to explore the
surroundings of the place, and one of the boys could not be found. The
other boy, on being told that his father had sent for him to come for
a walk, had managed--by accident, of course--to fall into the water
butt, and had to be dried and rigged out afresh. His clothes not
having been as yet unpacked this was of course impossible without
delay.

Mr. Markam was not quite satisfied with his walk. He could not meet
any of his neighbours. It was not that there were not enough people
about, for every house and cottage seemed to be full; but the people
when in the open were either in their doorways some distance behind
him, or on the roadway a long distance in front. As he passed he
could see the tops of heads and the whites of eyes in the windows or
round the corners of doors. The only interview which he had was
anything but a pleasant one. This was with an odd sort of old man who
was hardly ever heard to speak except to join in the 'Amens' in the
meeting-house. His sole occupation seemed to be to wait at the window
of the post-office from eight o'clock in the morning till the arrival
of the mail at one, when he carried the letter-bag to a neighbouring
baronial castle. The remainder of his day was spent on a seat in a
draughty part of the port, where the offal of the fish, the refuse of
the bait, and the house rubbish was thrown, and where the ducks were
accustomed to hold high revel.

When Saft Tammie beheld him coming he raised his eyes, which were
generally fixed on the nothing which lay on the roadway opposite his
seat, and, seeming dazzled as if by a burst of sunshine, rubbed them
and shaded them with his hand. Then he started up and raised his hand
aloft in a denunciatory manner as he spoke:--

'"Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher. All is vanity." Mon, be
warned in time! "Behold the lilies of the field, they toil not,
neither do they spin, yet Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like one of these." Mon! Mon! Thy vanity is as the quicksand which
swallows up all which comes within its spell. Beware vanity! Beware
the quicksand, which yawneth for thee, and which will swallow thee up!
See thyself! Learn thine own vanity! Meet thyself face to face, and
then in that moment thou shalt learn the fatal force of thy vanity.
Learn it, know it, and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee!' Then
without another word he went back to his seat and sat there immovable
and expressionless as before.

Markam could not but feel a little upset by this tirade. Only that it
was spoken by a seeming madman, he would have put it down to some
eccentric exhibition of Scottish humour or impudence; but the gravity
of the message--for it seemed nothing else--made such a reading
impossible. He was, however, determined not to give in to ridicule,
and although he had not yet seen anything in Scotland to remind him
even of a kilt, he determined to wear his Highland dress. When he
returned home, in less than half-an-hour, he found that every member
of the family was, despite the headaches, out taking a walk. He took
the opportunity afforded by their absence of locking himself in his
dressing-room, took off the Highland dress, and, putting on a suit of
flannels, lit a cigar and had a snooze. He was awakened by the noise
of the family coming in, and at once donning his dress made his
appearance in the drawing-room for tea.

He did not go out again that afternoon; but after dinner he put on his
dress again--he had, of course dressed for dinner as usual--and went
by himself for a walk on the sea-shore. He had by this time come to
the conclusion that he would get by degrees accustomed to the Highland
dress before making it his ordinary wear. The moon was up and he
easily followed the path through the sand-hills, and shortly struck
the shore. The tide was out and the beach firm as a rock, so he
strolled southwards to nearly the end of the bay. Here he was
attracted by two isolated rocks some little way out from the edge of
the dunes, so he strolled towards them. When he reached the nearest
one he climbed it, and, sitting there elevated some fifteen or twenty
feet over the waste of sand, enjoyed the lovely, peaceful prospect.
The moon was rising behind the headland of Pennyfold, and its light
was just touching the top of the furthermost rock of the Spurs some
three-quarters of a mile out; the rest of the rocks were in dark
shadow. As the moon rose over the headland, the rocks of the Spurs and
then the beach by degrees became flooded with light.

For a good while Mr. Markam sat and looked at the rising moon and the
growing area of light which followed its rise. Then he turned and
faced eastwards and sat with his chin in his hand looking seawards,
and revelling in the peace and beauty and freedom of the scene. The
roar of London--the darkness and the strife and weariness of London
life--seemed to have passed quite away, and he lived at the moment a
freer and higher life. He looked at the glistening water as it stole
its way over the flat waste of sand, coming closer and closer
insensibly--the tide had turned. Presently he heard a distant shouting
along the beach very far off.

'The fishermen calling to each other,' he said to himself and looked
around. As he did so he got a horrible shock, for though just then a
cloud sailed across the moon he saw, in spite of the sudden darkness
around him, his own image. For an instant, on the top of the opposite
rock he could see the bald back of the head and the Glengarry cap with
the immense eagle's feather. As he staggered back his foot slipped,
and he began to slide down towards the sand between the two rocks. He
took no concern as to falling, for the sand was really only a few feet
below him, and his mind was occupied with the figure or simulacrum of
himself, which had already disappeared. As the easiest way of reaching
_terra firma_ he prepared to jump the remainder of the distance. All
this had taken but a second, but the brain works quickly, and even as
he gathered himself for the spring he saw the sand below him lying so
marbly level shake and shiver in an odd way. A sudden fear overcame
him; his knees failed, and instead of jumping he slid miserably down
the rock, scratching his bare legs as he went. His feet touched the
sand--went through it like water--and he was down below his knees
before he realised that he was in a quicksand. Wildly he grasped at
the rock to keep himself from sinking further, and fortunately there
was a jutting spur or edge which he was able to grasp instinctively.
To this he clung in grim desperation. He tried to shout, but his
breath would not come, till after a great effort his voice rang out.
Again he shouted, and it seemed as if the sound of his own voice gave
him new courage, for he was able to hold on to the rock for a longer
time than he thought possible--though he held on only in blind
desperation. He was, however, beginning to find his grasp weakening,
when, joy of joys! his shout was answered by a rough voice from just
above him.

'God be thankit, I'm nae too late!' and a fisherman with great
thigh-boots came hurriedly climbing over the rock. In an instant he
recognised the gravity of the danger, and with a cheering 'Haud fast,
mon! I'm comin'!' scrambled down till he found a firm foothold. Then
with one strong hand holding the rock above, he leaned down, and
catching Markam's wrist, called out to him, 'Haud to me, mon! Haud to
me wi' ither hond!'

Then he lent his great strength, and with a steady, sturdy pull,
dragged him out of the hungry quicksand and placed him safe upon the
rock. Hardly giving him time to draw breath, he pulled and pushed
him--never letting him go for an instant--over the rock into the firm
sand beyond it, and finally deposited him, still shaking from the
magnitude of his danger, high upon the beach. Then he began to speak:

'Mon! but I was just in time. If I had no laucht at yon foolish lads
and begun to rin at the first you'd a bin sinkin' doon to the bowels
o' the airth be the noo! Wully Beagrie thocht you was a ghaist, and
Tom MacPhail swore ye was only like a goblin on a puddick-steel! "Na!"
said I. "Yon's but the daft Englishman--the loony that had escapit
frae the waxwarks." I was thinkin' that bein' strange and silly--if
not a whole-made feel--ye'd no ken the ways o' the quicksan'! I
shouted till warn ye, and then ran to drag ye aff, if need be. But God
be thankit, be ye fule or only half-daft wi' yer vanity, that I was no
that late!' and he reverently lifted his cap as he spoke.

Mr. Markam was deeply touched and thankful for his escape from a
horrible death; but the sting of the charge of vanity thus made once
more against him came through his humility. He was about to reply
angrily, when suddenly a great awe fell upon him as he remembered the
warning words of the half-crazy letter-carrier: 'Meet thyself face to
face, and repent ere the quicksand shall swallow thee!'

Here, too, he remembered the image of himself that he had seen and the
sudden danger from the deadly quicksand that had followed. He was
silent a full minute, and then said:

'My good fellow, I owe you my life!'

The answer came with reverence from the hardy fisherman, 'Na! Na! Ye
owe that to God; but, as for me, I'm only too glad till be the humble
instrument o' His mercy.'

'But you will let me thank you,' said Mr. Markam, taking both the
great hands of his deliverer in his and holding them tight. 'My heart
is too full as yet, and my nerves are too much shaken to let me say
much; but, believe me, I am very, very grateful!' It was quite evident
that the poor old fellow was deeply touched, for the tears were
running down his cheeks.

The fisherman said, with a rough but true courtesy:

'Ay, sir! thank me and ye will--if it'll do yer poor heart good. An'
I'm thinking that if it were me I'd be thankful too. But, sir, as for
me I need no thanks. I am glad, so I am!'

That Arthur Fernlee Markam was really thankful and grateful was shown
practically later on. Within a week's time there sailed into Port
Crooken the finest fishing smack that had ever been seen in the
harbour of Peterhead. She was fully found with sails and gear of all
kinds, and with nets of the best. Her master and men went away by the
coach, after having left with the salmon-fisher's wife the papers
which made her over to him.

As Mr. Markam and the salmon-fisher walked together along the shore
the former asked his companion not to mention the fact that he had
been in such imminent danger, for that it would only distress his dear
wife and children. He said that he would warn them all of the
quicksand, and for that purpose he, then and there, asked questions
about it till he felt that his information on the subject was
complete. Before they parted he asked his companion if he had happened
to see a second figure, dressed like himself on the other rock as he
had approached to succour him.

'Na! Na!' came the answer, 'there is nae sic another fule in these
parts. Nor has there been since the time o' Jamie Fleeman--him that
was fule to the Laird o' Udny. Why, mon! sic a heathenish dress as ye
have on till ye has nae been seen in these pairts within the memory o'
mon. An' I'm thinkin' that sic a dress never was for sittin' on the
cauld rock, as ye done beyont. Mon! but do ye no fear the rheumatism
or the lumbagy wi' floppin' doon on to the cauld stanes wi' yer bare
flesh? I was thinking that it was daft ye waur when I see ye the
mornin' doon be the port, but it's fule or eediot ye maun be for the
like o' thot!' Mr. Markam did not care to argue the point, and as they
were now close to his own home he asked the salmon-fisher to have a
glass of whisky--which he did--and they parted for the night. He took
good care to warn all his family of the quicksand, telling them that
he had himself been in some danger from it.

All that night he never slept. He heard the hours strike one after the
other; but try how he would he could not get to sleep. Over and over
again he went through the horrible episode of the quicksand, from the
time that Saft Tammie had broken his habitual silence to preach to him
of the sin of vanity and to warn him. The question kept ever arising
in his mind: 'Am I then so vain as to be in the ranks of the foolish?'
and the answer ever came in the words of the crazy prophet: '"Vanity
of vanities! All is vanity." Meet thyself face to face, and repent ere
the quicksand shall swallow thee!' Somehow a feeling of doom began to
shape itself in his mind that he would yet perish in that same
quicksand, for there he had already met himself face to face.

In the grey of the morning he dozed off, but it was evident that he
continued the subject in his dreams, for he was fully awakened by his
wife, who said:

'Do sleep quietly! That blessed Highland suit has got on your brain.
Don't talk in your sleep, if you can help it!' He was somehow
conscious of a glad feeling, as if some terrible weight had been
lifted from him, but he did not know any cause of it. He asked his
wife what he had said in his sleep, and she answered:

'You said it often enough, goodness knows, for one to remember
it--"Not face to face! I saw the eagle plume over the bald head! There
is hope yet! Not face to face!" Go to sleep! Do!' And then he did go
to sleep, for he seemed to realise that the prophecy of the crazy man
had not yet been fulfilled. He had not met himself face to face--as
yet at all events.

He was awakened early by a maid who came to tell him that there was a
fisherman at the door who wanted to see him. He dressed himself as
quickly as he could--for he was not yet expert with the Highland
dress--and hurried down, not wishing to keep the salmon-fisher
waiting. He was surprised and not altogether pleased to find that his
visitor was none other than Saft Tammie, who at once opened fire on
him:

'I maun gang awa' t' the post; but I thocht that I would waste an hour
on ye, and ca' roond just to see if ye waur still that fou wi' vanity
as on the nicht gane by. An I see that ye've no learned the lesson.
Well! the time is comin', sure eneucht! However I have all the time i'
the marnins to my ain sel', so I'll aye look roond jist till see how
ye gang yer ain gait to the quicksan', and then to the de'il! I'm aff
till ma wark the noo!' And he went straightway, leaving Mr. Markam
considerably vexed, for the maids within earshot were vainly trying to
conceal their giggles. He had fairly made up his mind to wear on that
day ordinary clothes, but the visit of Saft Tammie reversed his
decision. He would show them all that he was not a coward, and he
would go on as he had begun--come what might. When he came to
breakfast in full martial panoply the children, one and all, held down
their heads and the backs of their necks became very red indeed. As,
however, none of them laughed--except Titus, the youngest boy, who was
seized with a fit of hysterical choking and was promptly banished from
the room--he could not reprove them, but began to break his egg with a
sternly determined air. It was unfortunate that as his wife was
handing him a cup of tea one of the buttons of his sleeve caught in
the lace of her morning wrapper, with the result that the hot tea was
spilt over his bare knees. Not unnaturally, he made use of a swear
word, whereupon his wife, somewhat nettled, spoke out:

'Well, Arthur, if you will make such an idiot of yourself with that
ridiculous costume what else can you expect? You are not accustomed to
it--and you never will be!' In answer he began an indignant speech
with: 'Madam!' but he got no further, for now that the subject was
broached, Mrs. Markam intended to have her say out. It was not a
pleasant say, and, truth to tell, it was not said in a pleasant
manner. A wife's manner seldom is pleasant when she undertakes to tell
what she considers 'truths' to her husband. The result was that Arthur
Fernlee Markam undertook, then and there, that during his stay in
Scotland he would wear no other costume than the one she abused.
Woman-like his wife had the last word--given in this case with tears:

'Very well, Arthur! Of course you will do as you choose. Make me as
ridiculous as you can, and spoil the poor girls' chances in life.
Young men don't seem to care, as a general rule, for an idiot
father-in-law! But I must warn you that your vanity will some day get
a rude shock--if indeed you are not before then in an asylum or dead!'

It was manifest after a few days that Mr. Markam would have to take
the major part of his outdoor exercise by himself. The girls now and
again took a walk with him, chiefly in the early morning or late at
night, or on a wet day when there would be no one about; they
professed to be willing to go out at all times, but somehow something
always seemed to occur to prevent it. The boys could never be found at
all on such occasions, and as to Mrs. Markam she sternly refused to go
out with him on any consideration so long as he should continue to
make a fool of himself. On the Sunday he dressed himself in his
habitual broadcloth, for he rightly felt that church was not a place
for angry feelings; but on Monday morning he resumed his Highland
garb. By this time he would have given a good deal if he had never
thought of the dress, but his British obstinacy was strong, and he
would not give in. Saft Tammie called at his house every morning, and,
not being able to see him nor to have any message taken to him, used
to call back in the afternoon when the letter-bag had been delivered
and watched for his going out. On such occasions he never failed to
warn him against his vanity in the same words which he had used at the
first. Before many days were over Mr. Markam had come to look upon him
as little short of a scourge.

By the time the week was out the enforced partial solitude, the
constant chagrin, and the never-ending brooding which was thus
engendered, began to make Mr. Markam quite ill. He was too proud to
take any of his family into his confidence since they had in his view
treated him very badly. Then he did not sleep well at night, and when
he did sleep he had constantly bad dreams. Merely to assure himself
that his pluck was not failing him he made it a practice to visit the
quicksand at least once every day; he hardly ever failed to go there
the last thing at night. It was perhaps this habit that wrought the
quicksand with its terrible experience so perpetually into his dreams.
More and more vivid these became, till on waking at times he could
hardly realise that he had not been actually in the flesh to visit the
fatal spot. He sometimes thought that he might have been walking in
his sleep.

One night his dream was so vivid that when he awoke he could not
believe that it had only been a dream. He shut his eyes again and
again, but each time the vision, if it was a vision, or the reality,
if it was a reality, would rise before him. The moon was shining full
and yellow over the quicksand as he approached it; he could see the
expanse of light shaken and disturbed and full of black shadows as the
liquid sand quivered and trembled and wrinkled and eddied as was its
wont between its pauses of marble calm. As he drew close to it another
figure came towards it from the opposite side with equal footsteps. He
saw that it was his own figure, his very self, and in silent terror,
compelled by what force he knew not, he advanced--charmed as the bird
is by the snake, mesmerised or hypnotised--to meet this other self. As
he felt the yielding sand closing over him he awoke in the agony of
death, trembling with fear, and, strange to say, with the silly man's
prophecy seeming to sound in his ears: '"Vanity of vanities! All is
vanity!" See thyself and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee!'

So convinced was he that this was no dream that he arose, early as it
was, and dressing himself without disturbing his wife took his way to
the shore. His heart fell when he came across a series of footsteps on
the sands, which he at once recognised as his own. There was the same
wide heel, the same square toe; he had no doubt now that he had
actually been there, and half horrified, and half in a state of dreamy
stupor, he followed the footsteps, and found them lost in the edge of
the yielding quicksand. This gave him a terrible shock, for there were
no return steps marked on the sand, and he felt that there was some
dread mystery which he could not penetrate, and the penetration of
which would, he feared, undo him.

In this state of affairs he took two wrong courses. Firstly he kept
his trouble to himself, and, as none of his family had any clue to it,
every innocent word or expression which they used supplied fuel to the
consuming fire of his imagination. Secondly he began to read books
professing to bear upon the mysteries of dreaming and of mental
phenomena generally, with the result that every wild imagination of
every crank or half-crazy philosopher became a living germ of unrest
in the fertilising soil of his disordered brain. Thus negatively and
positively all things began to work to a common end. Not the least of
his disturbing causes was Saft Tammie, who had now become at certain
times of the day a fixture at his gate. After a while, being
interested in the previous state of this individual, he made inquiries
regarding his past with the following result.

Saft Tammie was popularly believed to be the son of a laird in one of
the counties round the Firth of Forth. He had been partially educated
for the ministry, but for some cause which no one ever knew threw up
his prospects suddenly, and, going to Peterhead in its days of whaling
prosperity, had there taken service on a whaler. Here off and on he
had remained for some years, getting gradually more and more silent in
his habits, till finally his shipmates protested against so taciturn a
mate, and he had found service amongst the fishing smacks of the
northern fleet. He had worked for many years at the fishing with
always the reputation of being 'a wee bit daft,' till at length he had
gradually settled down at Crooken, where the laird, doubtless knowing
something of his family history, had given him a job which practically
made him a pensioner. The minister who gave the information finished
thus:--

'It is a very strange thing, but the man seems to have some odd kind
of gift. Whether it be that "second sight" which we Scotch people are
so prone to believe in, or some other occult form of knowledge, I know
not, but nothing of a disastrous tendency ever occurs in this place
but the men with whom he lives are able to quote after the event some
saying of his which certainly appears to have foretold it. He gets
uneasy or excited--wakes up, in fact--when death is in the air!'

This did not in any way tend to lessen Mr. Markam's concern, but on
the contrary seemed to impress the prophecy more deeply on his mind.
Of all the books which he had read on his new subject of study none
interested him so much as a German one _Die Döppleganger_, by Dr.
Heinrich von Aschenberg, formerly of Bonn. Here he learned for the
first time of cases where men had led a double existence--each nature
being quite apart from the other--the body being always a reality with
one spirit, and a simulacrum with the other. Needless to say that Mr.
Markam realised this theory as exactly suiting his own case. The
glimpse which he had of his own back the night of his escape from the
quicksand--his own footmarks disappearing into the quicksand with no
return steps visible--the prophecy of Saft Tammie about his meeting
himself and perishing in the quicksand--all lent aid to the conviction
that he was in his own person an instance of the döppleganger. Being
then conscious of a double life he took steps to prove its existence
to his own satisfaction. To this end on one night before going to bed
he wrote his name in chalk on the soles of his shoes. That night he
dreamed of the quicksand, and of his visiting it--dreamed so vividly
that on walking in the grey of the dawn he could not believe that he
had not been there. Arising, without disturbing his wife, he sought
his shoes.

The chalk signatures were undisturbed! He dressed himself and stole
out softly. This time the tide was in, so he crossed the dunes and
struck the shore on the further side of the quicksand. There, oh,
horror of horrors! he saw his own footprints dying into the abyss!

He went home a desperately sad man. It seemed incredible that he, an
elderly commercial man, who had passed a long and uneventful life in
the pursuit of business in the midst of roaring, practical London,
should thus find himself enmeshed in mystery and horror, and that he
should discover that he had two existences. He could not speak of his
trouble even to his own wife, for well he knew that she would at once
require the fullest particulars of that other life--the one which she
did not know; and that she would at the start not only imagine but
charge him with all manner of infidelities on the head of it. And so
his brooding grew deeper and deeper still. One evening--the tide then
going out and the moon being at the full--he was sitting waiting for
dinner when the maid announced that Saft Tammie was making a
disturbance outside because he would not be let in to see him. He was
very indignant, but did not like the maid to think that he had any
fear on the subject, and so told her to bring him in. Tammie entered,
walking more briskly than ever with his head up and a look of vigorous
decision in the eyes that were so generally cast down. As soon as he
entered he said:

'I have come to see ye once again--once again; and there ye sit, still
just like a cockatoo on a pairch. Weel, mon, I forgie ye! Mind ye
that, I forgie ye!' And without a word more he turned and walked out
of the house, leaving the master in speechless indignation.

After dinner he determined to pay another visit to the quicksand--he
would not allow even to himself that he was afraid to go. And so,
about nine o'clock, in full array, he marched to the beach, and
passing over the sands sat on the skirt of the nearer rock. The full
moon was behind him and its light lit up the bay so that its fringe of
foam, the dark outline of the headland, and the stakes of the
salmon-nets were all emphasised. In the brilliant yellow glow the
lights in the windows of Port Crooken and in those of the distant
castle of the laird trembled like stars through the sky. For a long
time he sat and drank in the beauty of the scene, and his soul seemed
to feel a peace that it had not known for many days. All the pettiness
and annoyance and silly fears of the past weeks seemed blotted out,
and a new holy calm took the vacant place. In this sweet and solemn
mood he reviewed his late action calmly, and felt ashamed of himself
for his vanity and for the obstinacy which had followed it. And then
and there he made up his mind that the present would be the last time
he would wear the costume which had estranged him from those whom he
loved, and which had caused him so many hours and days of chagrin,
vexation, and pain.

But almost as soon as he arrived at this conclusion another voice
seemed to speak within him and mockingly to ask him if he should ever
get the chance to wear the suit again--that it was too late--he had
chosen his course and must now abide the issue.

'It is not too late,' came the quick answer of his better self; and
full of the thought, he rose up to go home and divest himself of the
now hateful costume right away. He paused for one look at the
beautiful scene. The light lay pale and mellow, softening every
outline of rock and tree and house-top, and deepening the shadows into
velvety-black, and lighting, as with a pale flame, the incoming tide,
that now crept fringe-like across the flat waste of sand. Then he left
the rock and stepped out for the shore.

But as he did so a frightful spasm of horror shook him, and for an
instant the blood rushing to his head shut out all the light of the
full moon. Once more he saw that fatal image of himself moving beyond
the quicksand from the opposite rock to the shore. The shock was all
the greater for the contrast with the spell of peace which he had just
enjoyed; and, almost paralysed in every sense, he stood and watched
the fatal vision and the wrinkly, crawling quicksand that seemed to
writhe and yearn for something that lay between. There could be no
mistake this time, for though the moon behind threw the face into
shadow he could see there the same shaven cheeks as his own, and the
small stubby moustache of a few weeks' growth. The light shone on the
brilliant tartan, and on the eagle's plume. Even the bald space at one
side of the Glengarry cap glistened, as did the cairngorm brooch on
the shoulder and the tops of the silver buttons. As he looked he felt
his feet slightly sinking, for he was still near the edge of the belt
of quicksand, and he stepped back. As he did so the other figure
stepped forward, so that the space between them was preserved.

So the two stood facing each other, as though in some weird
fascination; and in the rushing of the blood through his brain Markam
seemed to hear the words of the prophecy: 'See thyself face to face,
and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee.' He did stand face to face
with himself, he had repented--and now he was sinking in the
quicksand! The warning and prophecy were coming true.

Above him the seagulls screamed, circling round the fringe of the
incoming tide, and the sound being entirely mortal recalled him to
himself. On the instant he stepped back a few quick steps, for as yet
only his feet were merged in the soft sand. As he did so the other
figure stepped forward, and coming within the deadly grip of the
quicksand began to sink. It seemed to Markam that he was looking at
himself going down to his doom, and on the instant the anguish of his
soul found vent in a terrible cry. There was at the same instant a
terrible cry from the other figure, and as Markam threw up his hands
the figure did the same. With horror-struck eyes he saw him sink
deeper into the quicksand; and then, impelled by what power he knew
not, he advanced again towards the sand to meet his fate. But as his
more forward foot began to sink he heard again the cries of the
seagulls which seemed to restore his benumbed faculties. With a mighty
effort he drew his foot out of the sand which seemed to clutch it,
leaving his shoe behind, and then in sheer terror he turned and ran
from the place, never stopping till his breath and strength failed
him, and he sank half swooning on the grassy path through the
sandhills.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arthur Markam made up his mind not to tell his family of his terrible
adventure--until at least such time as he should be complete master of
himself. Now that the fatal double--his other self--had been engulfed
in the quicksand he felt something like his old peace of mind.

That night he slept soundly and did not dream at all; and in the
morning was quite his old self. It really seemed as though his newer
and worser self had disappeared for ever; and strangely enough Saft
Tammie was absent from his post that morning and never appeared there
again, but sat in his old place watching nothing, as of old, with
lack-lustre eye. In accordance with his resolution he did not wear his
Highland suit again, but one evening tied it up in a bundle, claymore,
dirk and philibeg and all, and bringing it secretly with him threw it
into the quicksand. With a feeling of intense pleasure he saw it
sucked below the sand, which closed above it into marble smoothness.
Then he went home and announced cheerily to his family assembled for
evening prayers:

'Well! my dears, you will be glad to hear that I have abandoned my
idea of wearing the Highland dress. I see now what a vain old fool I
was and how ridiculous I made myself! You shall never see it again!'

'Where is it, father?' asked one of the girls, wishing to say
something so that such a self-sacrificing announcement as her father's
should not be passed in absolute silence. His answer was so sweetly
given that the girl rose from her seat and came and kissed him. It
was:

'In the quicksand, my dear! and I hope that my worser self is buried
there along with it--for ever.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The remainder of the summer was passed at Crooken with delight by all
the family, and on his return to town Mr. Markam had almost forgotten
the whole of the incident of the quicksand, and all touching on it,
when one day he got a letter from the MacCallum More which caused him
much thought, though he said nothing of it to his family, and left it,
for certain reasons, unanswered. It ran as follows:--

      'The MacCallum More and Roderick MacDhu.
        'The Scotch All-Wool Tartan Clothing Mart.
          Copthall Court, E.C.,
            30th September, 1892.

'Dear Sir,--I trust you will pardon the liberty which I take in
writing to you, but I am desirous of making an inquiry, and I am
informed that you have been sojourning during the summer in
Aberdeenshire (Scotland, N.B.). My partner, Mr. Roderick MacDhu--as he
appears for business reasons on our bill-heads and in our
advertisements, his real name being Emmanuel Moses Marks of
London--went early last month to Scotland (N.B.) for a tour, but as I
have only once heard from him, shortly after his departure, I am
anxious lest any misfortune may have befallen him. As I have been
unable to obtain any news of him on making all inquiries in my power,
I venture to appeal to you. His letter was written in deep dejection
of spirit, and mentioned that he feared a judgment had come upon him
for wishing to appear as a Scotchman on Scottish soil, as he had one
moonlight night shortly after his arrival seen his 'wraith'. He
evidently alluded to the fact that before his departure he had
procured for himself a Highland costume similar to that which we had
the honour to supply to you, with which, as perhaps you will remember,
he was much struck. He may, however, never have worn it, as he was, to
my own knowledge, diffident about putting it on, and even went so far
as to tell me that he would at first only venture to wear it late at
night or very early in the morning, and then only in remote places,
until such time as he should get accustomed to it. Unfortunately he
did not advise me of his route so that I am in complete ignorance of
his whereabouts; and I venture to ask if you may have seen or heard of
a Highland costume similar to your own having been seen anywhere in
the neighbourhood in which I am told you have recently purchased the
estate which you temporarily occupied. I shall not expect an answer to
this letter unless you can give me some information regarding my
friend and partner, so pray do not trouble to reply unless there be
cause. I am encouraged to think that he may have been in your
neighbourhood as, though his letter is not dated, the envelope is
marked with the postmark of "Yellon" which I find is in Aberdeenshire,
and not far from the Mains of Crooken.

  'I have the honour to be, dear sir,
      'Yours very respectfully,
          'JOSHUA SHEENY COHEN BENJAMIN
            '(The MacCallum More.)'



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DRACULA'S GUEST***


******* This file should be named 10150-8.txt or 10150-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/1/5/10150



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Project Gutenberg's The Countess of Charny, by Alexandre Dumas (pere)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Countess of Charny
       or, The Execution of King Louis XVI

Author: Alexandre Dumas (pere)

Translator: Henry Llewellyn Williams

Release Date: May 21, 2013 [EBook #42757]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COUNTESS OF CHARNY ***




Produced by Veronika Redfern, Juliet Sutherland and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









     PRICE, 25 CENTS.
     THE SUNSET SERIES.
     By Subscription, per Year, Nine Dollars.      March 12, 1891
     Entered at the New York Post Office as second-class matter.

     Copyright 1891, by J. S. OGILVIE.




     THE COUNTESS OF CHARNY.

     BY
     Alex. Dumas.

     NEW YORK:
     J. S. OGILVIE PUBLISHING COMPANY,
     57 ROSE STREET.




A GREAT OFFER!


[Illustration: Book Collection]

The price of Each One of these books bound in cloth is 75 cents, but we
will send you the FIVE BOOKS bound in paper for 75 cents!


2269 Pages for 75 Cents.

Remarkable but True. We will, for 75 cents, send the Leather Stocking
Tales, by J. Fenimore Cooper, comprising the five separate books, The
Deerslayer, The Pathfinder, The Pioneer, The Prairie, The Last of
the Mohicans, set in large long primer type, and each bound in heavy
lithograph covers. Sent by mail, postpaid, for 75 cents, and money
refunded if you are not satisfied. Address,

     _J. S. OGILVIE PUBLISHING COMPANY,
     57 Rose Street, New York._


HOW TO GET MARRIED

Although a Woman, or The Art of Pleasing Men. By a YOUNG
WIDOW. The following is the table of contents: Girls and
Matrimony. The Girls Whom Men Like. The Girl Who Wins and How She Does
It. The Girl Who Fails. Some Unfailing Methods. A Word of Warning. The
Secret of the Widow's Power. Lady Beauty. The Loved Wife. Every woman,
married or single, should read this book. It will be sent by mail,
postpaid, _securely sealed_, on receipt of only 25 cents. Address,

     _J. S. OGILVIE PUBLISHING COMPANY,
     57 Rose Street, New York._




     THE COUNTESS OF CHARNY;
     OR,
     THE EXECUTION OF KING LOUIS XVI.

     A HISTORICAL NOVEL OF LOVE AND
     LOYALTY.

     BY ALEX. DUMAS
     AUTHOR OF "MONTE CRISTO," "BALSAMO THE MAGICIAN," "THE
     THREE MUSKETEERS," "CHICOT THE JESTER," "THE KNIGHT
     OF REDCASTLE," ETC., ETC.

     TRANSLATED FROM THE LATEST PARIS EDITION
     BY
     HENRY LLEWELLYN WILLIAMS.

     NEW YORK:
     J. S. OGILVIE PUBLISHING COMPANY,
     57 ROSE STREET.




CONTENTS.


  Chapter                                  Page
       I. THE NEW MEN AT THE WHEEL.           4
      II. GILBERT'S CANDIDATE.               17
     III. POWERFUL, PERHAPS; HAPPY, NEVER.   24
      IV. THE FOES FACE TO FACE.             38
       V. THE UNINVITED VISITORS.            42
      VI. "THE COUNTRY IS IN DANGER!"        56
     VII. THE MEN FROM MARSEILLES.           63
    VIII. THE FRIEND IN NEED.                66
      IX. CHARNY ON GUARD.                   71
       X. BILLET AND PITOU.                  76
      XI. IN THE MORNING.                    82
     XII. THE FIRST MASSACRE.                88
    XIII. THE REPULSE.                       92
     XIV. THE LAST OF THE CHARNYS.           99
      XV. THE BLOOD-STAINS.                 109
     XVI. THE WIDOW.                        117
    XVII. WHAT ANDREA WANTED OF GILBERT.    126
   XVIII. THE ASSEMBLY AND THE COMMUNE.     131
     XIX. CAPTAIN BEAUSIRE APPEARS AGAIN.   136
      XX. THE EMETIC.                       142
     XXI. BEAUSIRE'S BRAVADO.               148
    XXII. SET UPON DYING.                   153
   XXIII. THE DEATH OF THE COUNTESS.        162
    XXIV. THE ROYAL MARTYR.                 167
     XXV. MASTER GAMAIN TURNS UP.           174
    XXVI. THE TRIAL OF THE KING.            178
   XXVII. THE PARALLEL TO CHARLES I.        185
  XXVIII. CAGLIOSTRO'S ADVICE.              190
    XXIX. THE CROWN OF ANGE'S LOVE.         195
     XXX. THE EFFECT OF HAPPY NEWS.         201
    XXXI. THE EASY-CHAIR.                   206
   XXXII. WHAT PITOU DID WITH THE FIND.     210
          ADVERTISEMENTS.                   215




THE COUNTESS OF CHARNY.




CHAPTER I.

THE NEW MEN AT THE WHEEL.


It was on the first of October, 1791, that the new Legislative Assembly
was to be inaugurated over France.

King Louis XVI., captured with Queen Marie Antoinette and the royal
family, while attempting to escape from the kingdom and join his
brothers and the other princes abroad, was held in a kind of detention,
like imprisonment without hard labor, in the Tuileries Palace in Paris.

His fate hung on the members of the new House of Representatives. Let
us hasten to see what they were.

The Congress was composed of seven hundred and forty-five members: four
hundred lawyers of one kind or another; some seventy literary men;
seventy priests who had taken the oath to abide by the Constitution,
not yet framed, but to which the king had subscribed on the sketch. The
remaining two hundred odd were landholders, farming their own estates
or hiring them out to others.

Among these was François Billet, a robust peasant of forty-five,
distinguished by the people of Paris and France as a hero, from having
been mainly instrumental in the taking of the Bastile, regarded as the
embodiment of the ancient tyranny, now almost leveled with the dust.

Billet had suffered two wrongs at the hands of the king's men and the
nobles, which he had sworn to avenge as well on the classes as on the
individuals.

His farm-house had been pillaged by Paris policemen acting under a
blank warrant signed by the king and issued at the request of Andrea
de Taverney, Countess of Charny, the queen's favorite, as her husband
the count was reckoned, too. She had a spite against Billet's friend,
Dr. Honore Gilbert, a noted patriot and politician. In his youth, this
afterward distinguished physician had taken advantage of her senses
being steeped in a mesmeric swoon, to lower her pride. Thanks to this
trance and from his overruling love, he was the progenitor of her son,
Sebastian Emile Gilbert; but with all the pride of this paternity, he
was haunted by unceasing remorse. Andrea could not forgive this crime,
all the more as it was a thorn in her side since her marriage.

It was a marriage enforced on her, as the Count of Charny had been
caught by the king on his knees to the queen; and to prevent the
stupid monarch being convinced by this scene that there was truth in
the tattle at court that Count Charny was Marie Antoinette's paramour,
she had explained that he merely was suing for the hand of her friend
Andrea. The king's consent given, this marriage took place, but for
six years the couple dwelt apart; not that mutual love did not prevail
between them, but neither was aware of the affection each had inspired
in the other at first sight.

The new countess thought that Charny's affection for the queen was a
guilty and durable one; while he, believing his wife, by compulsion,
a saint on earth, dared not presume on the position which fate and
devotion to their sovereign had imposed on them both.

This devotion was confirmed on the count's part, cemented by blood;
for his two brothers, Valence and Isidore, had lost their lives in
defending the king and queen from the revolutionists.

Andrea had a brother, Philip, who also loved the queen, but he had been
offended by her amour with Charny; and, being touched by an American
republican fever while fighting with Lafayette for the liberation of
the thirteen colonies, he had quitted the court of France.

On his way he had wounded Gilbert, whom he learned to be his sister's
wronger, as well as having stolen away her infant son; but although
the wound would have been mortal under other treatment, it had been
healed by the wondrous medicaments of Joseph Balsamo, _alias_ Count
Cagliostro, the celebrated head of the Invisibles, a branch of the
Orient Freemasons, dedicated to overthrow the monarchy and set up a
republic, after the United States model, in France, if not in Europe.

Gilbert and Cagliostro were therefore fast friends, to say nothing of
the latter's regret that he should have set temptation in the young
man's way; it was he who had plunged Andrea into the magnetic slumber
from which she had awakened a maid no longer.

But some recompense had come to the proud lady, after the six
years' wedded life to the very man she adored, though fate and
misunderstanding had estranged them. On learning what a martyr she
had been through the unconscious motherhood, Count George had more
than forgiven her--he worshiped her; and in their country seat at
Boursonnes, eighteen miles from Paris, he was forgetting, in her lovely
arms the demands of his queen, his king, and his caste, to use his
influence in the political arena.

This silence on his part led to the candidature of Farmer Billet being
unimpeded.

Besides, Charny would hardly have moved in opposition to the latter,
as one cause of the enmity of the peasant was his daughter's ruin by
Viscount Isidore Charny. The death of the latter, not being by Billet's
hand, had not appeased the grudge. He was a stern, unrelenting man; and
just as he would not forgive his daughter Catherine for her dishonor,
or even look upon her son, he stood out uncompromisingly against the
nobles and the priests.

Charny had stolen his daughter; the clergy, in the person of his parish
priest, Father Fortier, had refused burial to his wife.

On her grave he had vowed eternal hostility to the nobles and the
clericals.

The farmers had great power at election time, as they employed ten,
twenty, or thirty hands; and though the suffrage was divided into two
classes at the period, the result depended on the rural vote.

As each man quitted Billet at the grave, he shook him by the hand,
saying:

"It is a sure thing, brother."

Billet had gone home to his lonely farm, easy on this score; for the
first time he saw a plain way of returning the noble class and royalty
all the harm they had done him. He felt, but did not reason, and his
thirst for vengeance was as blind as the blows he had received.

His daughter had come home to nurse her mother, and receive at the last
gasp her blessing and for her son, born in shame; but Billet had said
never a word to her; none could tell if he were aware of her flitting
through the farm. Since a year he had not uttered her name, and it was
the same as if she had never existed.

Her only friend was Ange Pitou, a poor peasant lad whom Billet had
harbored when he was driven from home by his Aunt Angelique.

As Catherine was really the ruler of the roast on the farm, it was but
natural that Pitou should offer her some part of the gratitude Billet
had earned. This excellent feeling expanded into love; but there was
little chance for the peasant when the girl had been captivated by the
elegant young lord, although the elevation common during revolution had
exalted Ange into a captaincy of the National Guards.

But Pitou had never swerved in his love for the deluded girl. He had a
heart of gold; he was deeply sorry that Catherine had not loved him,
but on comparing himself with young Charny, he acknowledged that she
must prefer him. He envied Isidore, but he bore Catherine no ill-will;
quite otherwise, he still loved her with profound and entire devotion.

To say this dedication was completely exempt from anguish, is going too
far; but the pangs which made Pitou's heart ache at each new token of
Catherine's love for her dead lover, showed his ineffable goodness.

All his feeling for Catherine when Isidore was slain at Varennes,
where Billet arrested the king in his flight, was of utter pity.
Quite contrary to Billet, he did justice to the young noble in the
way of grace, generosity, and kindness, though he was his rival
without knowing it. Like Catherine, he knew that the barriers of caste
were insurmountable, and that the viscount could not have made his
sweetheart his wife.

The consequence was that Pitou perhaps more loved the widow in her
sorrow than when she was the coquettish girl, but it came to pass that
he almost loved the little orphan boy like his own.

Let none be astonished, therefore, that after taking leave of Billet
like the others, Ange went toward Haramont instead of Billet's farm,
which might also be his home.

But he had lodgings at Haramont village, where he was born, and he was
chief of the National Guards there.

They were so accustomed to his sudden departures and unexpected
returns, that nobody was worried at them. When he went away, they said
to one another: "He has gone to town to confer with General Lafayette,"
for the French lieutenant of General Washington was the friend, here as
there, of Dr. Gilbert, who was their fellow-peasants' patron, and had
furnished the funds to equip the Haramont company of volunteers.

On their commander's return they asked news of the capital; and as
he could give the freshest and truest, thanks to Dr. Gilbert, who was
an honorary physician to the king as well as friend of Cagliostro--in
other words, the communicator between the two Leyden jars of the
revolution--Pitou's predictions were sure to be realized in a few days,
so that all continued to show him blind trust, as well as military
captain as political prophet.

On his part, Gilbert knew all that was good and self-sacrificing in
the peasant; he felt that he was a man to whom he might at the scratch
intrust his life or Sebastian's--a treasure or a commission, anything
confided to strength and loyalty. Every time Pitou came to Paris, the
doctor would ask him if he stood in need of anything, without the young
man coloring up; and while he would always say, "Nothing, thank you,
Doctor Gilbert," this did not prevent the physician giving him some
money, which Pitou ingulfed in his pocket.

A few gold pieces, with what he picked up in the game shot or trapped
in the Duke of Orleans' woods, were a fortune; so, rarely did he find
himself at the end of his resources when he met the doctor and had his
supply renewed.

Knowing, then, how friendly Pitou was with Catherine and her baby, it
will be understood that he hastily separated from Billet, to know how
his cast-off daughter was getting on.

His road to Haramont took him past a hut in the woods where lived a
veteran of the wars, who, on a pension and the privilege of killing a
hare or a rabbit each day, lived a happy hermit's life, remote from
man. Father Clovis, as this old soldier was called, was a great friend
of Pitou. He had taught the boy to go gunning, and also the military
drill by which he had trained the Haramont Guards to be the envy of the
county. When Catherine was banished from her father's, after Billet had
tried to shoot Isidore, his hut sheltered her till after the birth of
her son. On her applying once more for the like hospitality, he had
not hesitated; and when Pitou came along, she was sitting on the bed,
with tears on her cheek at the revival of sad memories, and her boy in
her arms.

On seeing the new-comer, Catherine set down the child and offered
her forehead for Pitou's kiss; he gladly took her two hands, kissed
her, and the child was sheltered by the arch formed with his stooping
figure. Dropping on his knees to her and kissing the baby's little
hands, he exclaimed:

"Never mind, I am rich; Master Isidore shall never come to want."

Pitou had twenty-five gold louis, which he reckoned to make him rich.
Keen of wit and kind of heart, Catherine appreciated all that is good.

"Thank you, Captain Pitou," she said; "I believe you, and I am happy in
so believing, for you are my only friend, and if you were to cast me
off, we should stand alone in the world; but you never will, will you?"

"Oh, don't talk like that," cried Pitou, sobbing; "you will make me
pour out all the tears in my body."

"I was wrong; excuse me," she said.

"No, no, you are right; I am a fool to blubber."

"Captain Pitou," said Catherine, "I should like an airing. Give me your
arm for a stroll under the trees. I fancy it will do me good."

"I feel as if I were smothering myself," added Pitou.

The child had no need of air, nothing but sleep; so he was laid abed,
and Catherine walked out with Pitou.

Five minutes after they were in the natural temple, under the huge
trees.

Without being a philosopher on a level with Voltaire or Rousseau,
Pitou understood that he and Catherine were atoms carried on by the
whirlwind. But these atoms had their joy and grief just like the other
atoms called king, queen, nobles; the mill of God, held by fatality,
ground crowns and thrones to dust at the same time, and crushed
Catherine's happiness no less harshly than if she wore a diadem.

Two years and a half before, Pitou was a poor peasant lad, hunted from
home by his Aunt Angelique, received by Billet, feasted by Catherine,
and "cut out" by Isidore.

At present, Ange Pitou was a power; he wore a sword by his side
and epaulets on his shoulders; he was called a captain, and he was
protecting the widow and son of the slain Viscount Isidore.

Relatively to Pitou the expression was exact of Danton, who, when asked
why he was making the revolution, replied: "To put on high what was
undermost, and send the highest below all."

But though these ideas danced in his head, he was not the one to profit
by them, and the good and modest fellow went on his knees to beg
Catherine to let him shield her and the boy.

Like all suffering hearts, Catherine had a finer appreciation in grief
than in joy. Pitou, who was in her happy days a lad of no consequence,
became the holy creature he really was; in other words, a man of
goodness, candor, and devotion. The result was that, unfortunate and
in want of a friend, she understood that Pitou was just the friend she
wished; and so, always received by Catherine with one hand held out to
him, and a witching smile, Pitou began to lead a life of bliss of which
he never had had the idea even in dreams of paradise.

During this time, Billet, still mute as regarded his daughter, pursued
his idea of being nominated for the House while getting in his harvest.
Only one man could have beaten him, if he had the same ambition; but,
entirely absorbed in his love and happiness, the Count of Charny, the
world forgetting, believed himself forgotten by the world. He did not
think of the matter, enjoying his unexpected felicity.

Hence, nothing opposed Billet's election in Villers Cotterets district,
and he was elected by an immense majority.

As soon as chosen, he began to turn everything into money; it had been
a good year. He set aside his landlord's share, reserved his own, put
aside the grain for sowing, and the fodder for his live stock, and the
cash to keep the work-folks going, and one morning sent for Pitou.

Now and then Pitou paid him a visit. Billet always welcomed him with
open hand, made him take meals, if anything was on the board, or wine
or cider, if it was the right time for drinks. But never had Billet
sent for Pitou. Hence, it was not without disquiet that the young man
proceeded to the farm.

Billet was always grave; nobody could say that he had seen a smile pass
over his lips since his daughter had left the farm. This time he was
graver than usual.

Still he held out his hand in the old manner to Pitou, shook his with
more vigor than usual, and kept it in his, while the other looked at
him with wonder.

"Pitou, you are an honest fellow," said the farmer.

"Faith, I believe I am," replied Pitou.

"I am sure of it."

"You are very good, Master Billet."

"It follows that, as I am going away, I shall leave you at the head of
my farm."

"Impossible! There are a lot of petty matters for which a woman's eye
is indispensable."

"I know it," replied Billet; "you can select the woman to share the
superintendence with you. I shall not ask her name; I don't want to
know it; and when I come down to the farm, I shall notify you a week
ahead, so she will have time to get out of the way if she ought not to
see me or I see her."

"Very well, Master Billet," said the new steward.

"Now, in the granary is the grain for sowing; also the hay and other
fodder for the cattle, and in this drawer you see the cash to pay the
hands." He opened a drawer full of hard money.

"Stop a bit, master. How much is in this drawer?"

"I do not know," rejoined Billet, locking the drawer and giving the key
to Pitou, with the words; "When you want more, ask for it."

Pitou felt all the trust in this speech and put out his hand to grasp
the other's, but was checked by his humility.

"Nonsense," said Billet; "why should not honest men grasp hands?"

"If you should want me in town?"

"Rest easy; I shall not forget you. It is two o'clock; I shall start
for Paris at five. At six, you might be here with the woman you choose
to second you."

"Right; but then, there is no time to lose," said Pitou. "I hope we
shall soon meet again, dear Master Billet."

Billet watched him hurrying away as long as he could see him, and when
he disappeared, he said: "Now, why did not Catherine fall in love with
an honest chap like that, rather than one of those noble vermin who
leaves her a mother without being a wife, and a widow without her being
wed."

It is needless to say that Billet got upon the Villers Cotterets stage
to ride to Paris at five, and that at six Catherine and little Isidore
re-entered the farm.

Billet found himself among young men in the House, not merely
representatives, but fighters; for it was felt that they had to wrestle
with the unknown.

They were armed against two enemies, the clergy and the nobility. If
these resisted, the orders were for them to be overcome.

The king was pitied, and the members were left free to treat him as
occasion dictated. It was hoped that he might escape the threefold
power of the queen, the clergy, and the aristocracy; if they upheld
him, they would all be broken to pieces with him. They moved that the
title of majesty should be suppressed.

"What shall we call the executive power, then?" asked a voice.

"Call him 'the King of the French,'" shouted Billet. "It is a pretty
title enough for Capet to be satisfied with."

Moreover, instead of a throne, the King of the French had to content
himself with a plain arm-chair, and that was placed on the left of the
speaker's, so that the monarch should be subordinated.

In the absence of the king, the Constitution was sworn to by the sad,
cold House, all aware that the impotent laws would not endure a year.

As these motions were equivalent to saying, "there is no longer a
king." Money, as usual, took fright; down went the stocks dreadfully,
and the bankers took alarm.

There was a revulsion in favor of the king, and his speech in the House
was so applauded that he went to the theater that evening in high glee.
That night he wrote to the powers of Europe that he had subscribed to
the Constitution.

So far, the House had been tolerant, mild to the refractory priests,
and paying pensions to the princes and nobles who had fled abroad.

We shall see how the nobles recompensed this mildness.

When they were debating on paying the old and infirm priests, though
they might be opposed to the Reformation, news came from Avignon of
a massacre of revolutionists by the religious fanatics, and a bloody
reprisal of the other party.

As for the runaway nobles, still drawing revenue from their country,
this is what they were doing.

They reconciled Austria with Prussia, making friends of two enemies.
They induced Russia to forbid the French embassador going about the St.
Petersburg streets, and sent a minister to the refugees at Coblentz.
They made Berne punish a town for singing the "It shall go on."
They led the kings to act roughly; Russia and Sweden sent back with
unbroken seals Louis XVI.'s dispatches announcing his adhesion to the
Constitution.

Spain refused to receive it, and a French revolutionist would have been
burned by the Inquisition only for his committing suicide.

Venice threw on St. Mark's Place the corpse of a man strangled in the
night by the Council of Ten, with the plain inscription: "This was a
Freemason."

The Emperor and the King of Prussia did answer, but it was by a threat:
"We trust we shall not have to take precautions against the repetition
of events promising such sad auguries."

Hence there was a religious war in La Vendee and in the south, with
prospective war abroad.

At present the intention of the crowned heads was to stifle the
revolution rather than cut its throat.

The defiance of aristocratic Europe was accepted, and instead of
waiting for the attack, the orator of the House cried for France to
begin the movement.

The absentee princes were summoned home on penalty of losing all rights
to the succession; the nobles' property was seized, unless they took
the oath of allegiance to the country. The priests were granted a week
to take the oath, or to be imprisoned, and no churches could be used
for worship unless by the sworn clergy.

Lafayette's party wished the king to oppose his veto to these acts,
but the queen so hated Lafayette that she induced the Court party to
support Petion instead of the general for the post of mayor of Paris.
Strange blindness, in favor of Petion, her rude jailer, who had brought
her back from the flight to Varennes.

On the nineteenth of December the king vetoed the bill against the
priests.

That night, at the Jacobin Club, the debate was hot. Virchaux, a
Swiss, offered the society a sword for the first general who should
vanquish the enemies of freedom. Isnard, the wrath of the House, a
southerner, drew the sword, and leaped up into the rostrum, crying:

"Behold the sword of the exterminating angel! It will be victorious!
France will give a loud call, and all the people will respond; the
earth will then be covered with warriors, and the foes of liberty will
be wiped out from the list of men!"

Ezekiel could not have spoken better. This drawn sword was not to be
sheathed, for war broke out within and without. The Switzer's sword was
first to smite the King of France, the foreign sovereigns afterward.




CHAPTER II.

GILBERT'S CANDIDATE.


Dr. Gilbert had not seen the queen for six months, since he had let her
know that he was informed by Cagliostro that she was deceiving him.

He was therefore astonished to see the king's valet enter his room
one morning. He thought the king was sick and had sent for him, but
the messenger reassured him. He was wanted in the palace, whither he
hastened to go.

He was profoundly attached to the king; he pitied Marie Antoinette more
as a woman than a queen. It was profound pity, for she inspired neither
love nor devotion.

The lady waiting to greet Gilbert was the Princess Elizabeth. Neither
king nor queen, after his showing them he saw they were playing him
false, had dared to send directly to him; they put Lady Elizabeth
forward.

Her first words proved to the doctor that he was not mistaken in his
surmise.

"Doctor Gilbert," said she, "I do not know whether others have
forgotten the tokens of interest you showed my brother on our return
from Versailles, and those you showed my sister on our return from
Varennes, but I remember."

"Madame," returned Gilbert, bowing, "God, in His wisdom, hath decided
that you should have all the merits, memory included--a scarce virtue
in our days, and particularly so among royal personages."

"I hope you are not referring to my brother, who often speaks of you,
and praises your experience."

"As a medical adviser," remarked Gilbert, smiling.

"Yes; but he thinks you can be a physician to the realm as well as to
the ruler."

"Very kind of the king. For which case is he calling me in at present?"

"It is not the king who calls you, sir, but I," responded the lady,
blushing; for her chaste heart knew not how to lie.

"You? Your health worries me the least; your pallor arises from fatigue
and disquiet, not from bad health."

"You are right; I am not trembling for myself, but my brother, who
makes me fret."

"So he does me, madame."

"Oh, our uneasiness does not probably spring from the same cause, as I
am concerned about his health. I do not mean that he is unwell, but he
is downcast and disheartened. Some ten days ago--I am counting the days
now--he ceased speaking, except to me, and in his favorite pastime of
backgammon he only utters the necessary terms of the game."

"It is eleven days since he went to the House to present his veto. Why
was he not mute that day instead of the next?"

"Is it your opinion that he should have sanctioned that impious
decree?" demanded the princess, quickly.

"My opinion is, that to put the king in front of the priests in the
coming tide, the rising storm, is to have priests and king broken by
the same wave."

"What would you do in my poor brother's place, doctor?"

"A party is growing, like those genii of the Arabian Nights, which
becomes a hundred cubits high an hour after release from the
imprisoning bottle."

"You allude to the Jacobins?"

Gilbert shook his head.

"No; I mean the Girondists, who wish for war, a national desire."

"But war with whom? With the emperor, our brother? The King of Spain,
our nephew? Our enemies, Doctor Gilbert, are at home, and not outside
of France, in proof of which--" She hesitated, but he besought her to
speak.

"I really do not know that I can tell you, though it is the reason of
my asking you here."

"You may speak freely to one who is devoted and ready to give his life
to the king."

"Do you believe there is any counterbane?" she inquired.

"Universal?" queried Gilbert, smiling. "No, madame; each venomous
substance has its antidote, though they are of little avail generally."

"What a pity!"

"There are two kinds of poisons, mineral and vegetable--of what sort
would you speak?"

"Doctor, I am going to tell you a great secret. One of our cooks, who
left the royal kitchen to set up a bakery of his own, has returned to
our service, with the intention of murdering the king. This red-hot
Jacobin has been heard crying that France would be relieved if the king
were put out of the way."

"In general, men fit for such a crime do not go about bragging
beforehand. But I suppose you take precautions?"

"Yes; it is settled that the king shall live on roast meat, with a
trusty hand to supply the bread and wine. As the king is fond of
pastry, Madame Campan orders what he likes, as though for herself. We
are warned especially against powdered sugar."

"In which arsenic might be mixed unnoticed?"

"Exactly. It was the queen's habit to use it for her lemonade, but we
have entirely given up the use of it. The king, the queen, and I take
meals together, ringing for what we want. Madame Campan brings us what
we like, secretly, and hides it under the table; we pretend to eat the
usual things while the servants are in the room. This is how we live,
sir; and yet the queen and I tremble every instant lest the king should
turn pale and cry out he was in pain."

"Let me say at once, madame," returned the doctor, "that I do not
believe in these threats of poisoning; but in any event, I am under
his majesty's orders. What does the king desire? That I should have
lodgings in the palace? I will stay here in such a way as to be at hand
until the fears are over."

"Oh, my brother is not afraid!" the princess hastened to say.

"I did not mean that. Until your fears are over. I have some practice
in poisonings and their remedies. I am ready to baffle them in whatever
shape they are presented; but allow me to say, madame, that all fears
for the king might be removed if he were willing."

"Oh, what must be done for that?" intervened a voice, not the Lady
Elizabeth's, and which, by its emphatic and ringing tone, made Gilbert
turn.

It was the queen, and he bowed.

"Has the queen doubted the sincerity of my offers?"

"Oh, sir, so many heads and hearts have turned in this tempestuous
wind, that one knows not whom to trust."

"Which is why your majesty receives from the Feuillants Club a Premier
shaped by the Baroness de Stael?"

"You know that?" cried the royal lady, starting.

"I know your majesty is pledged to take Count Louis de Narbonne."

"And, of course, you blame me?"

"No; it is a trial like others. When the king shall have tried all, he
may finish by the one with whom he should have commenced."

"You know Madame de Stael? What do you think of her?"

"Physically, she is not altogether attractive."

The queen smiled; as a woman, she was not sorry to hear another woman
decried who just then was widely talked about.

"But her talent, her parts, her merits?"

"She is good and generous, madame; none of her enemies would remain so
after a quarter of an hour's conversation."

"I speak of her genius, sir; politics are not managed by the heart."

"Madame, the heart spoils nothing, not even in politics; but let us
not use the word genius rashly. Madame de Stael has great and immense
talent, but it does not rise to genius; she is as iron to the steel of
her master, Rousseau. As a politician, she is given more heed than she
deserves. Her drawing-room is the meeting-place of the English party.
Coming of the middle class as she does, and that the money-worshiping
middle class, she has the weakness of loving a lord; she admires
the English from thinking that they are an aristocratic people.
Being ignorant of the history of England, and the mechanism of its
government, she takes for the descendants of the Norman Conquerors the
baronets created yesterday. With old material, other people make a new
stock; with the new, England often makes the old."

"Do you see in this why Baroness de Stael proposes De Narbonne to us?"

"Hem! This time, madame, two likings are combined: that for the
aristocracy and the aristocrat."

"Do you imagine that she loves Louis de Narbonne on account of his
descent?"

(Louis de Narbonne was supposed to be an incestuous son of King Louis
XV.)

"It is not on account of any ability, I reckon?"

"But nobody is less well-born than Louis de Narbonne; his father is not
even known."

"Only because one dares not look at the sun."

"So you do not believe that De Narbonne is the outcome of the Swedish
Embassy, as the Jacobins assert, with Robespierre at the head?"

"Yes; only he comes from the wife's boudoir, not the lord's study. To
suppose Lord de Stael has a hand in it, is to suppose he is master in
his own house. Goodness, no; this is not an embassador's treachery,
but a loving woman's weakness. Nothing but Love, the great, eternal
magician, could impel a woman to put the gigantic sword of the
revolution in that frivolous rake's hands."

"Do you allude to the demagogue Isnard kissed at the Jacobin Club?"

"Alas, madame, I speak of the one suspended over your head."

"Therefore, it is your opinion that we are wrong to accept De Narbonne
as Minister of War?"

"You would do better to take at once his successor, Dumouriez."

"A soldier of fortune?"

"Ha! the worst word is spoken; and it is unfair any way."

"Was not Dumouriez a private soldier?"

"I am well aware that Dumouriez is not of that court nobility to which
everything is sacrificed. Of the rustic nobility, unable to obtain
a rank, he enlisted as a common soldier. At twenty years he fought
five or six troopers, though hacked badly, and despite this proof of
courage, he languished in the ranks."

"He sharpened his wits by serving Louis XV. as spy."

"Why do you call that spying in him which you rate diplomacy in others?
I know that he carried on correspondence with the king without the
knowledge of the ministers; but what noble of the court does not do the
same?"

"But, doctor, this man whom you recommend is essentially a most immoral
one," exclaimed the queen, betraying her deep knowledge of politics
by the details into which she went. "He has no principles--no idea of
honor. The Duke of Choiseul told me that he laid before him two plans
about Corsica--one to set her free, the other to subdue her."

"Quite true; but Choiseul failed to say that the former was preferred,
and that Dumouriez fought bravely for its success."

"The day when we accept him for minister it will be equivalent to a
declaration of war to all Europe."

"Why, madame, this declaration is already made in all hearts," retorted
Gilbert. "Do you know how many names are down in this district as
volunteers to start for the campaign? Six hundred thousand. In the
Jura, the women have proposed all the men shall march, as they, with
pikes, will guard their homes."

"You have spoken a word which makes me shudder--pikes! Oh, the pikes
of '89! I can ever see the heads of my Life Guardsmen carried on the
pikes' point."

"Nevertheless, it was a woman, a mother, who suggested a national
subscription to manufacture pikes."

"Was it also a woman who suggested your Jacobins adopting the red cap
of liberty, the color of blood?"

"Your majesty is in error on that point," said Gilbert, although he
did not care to enlighten the queen wholly on the ancient head-gear.
"A symbol was wanted of equality, and as all Frenchmen could not well
dress alike, a part of a dress was alone adopted: the cap such as the
poor peasant wears. The red color was preferred, not as it happens to
be that of blood, but because gay, bright, and a favorite with the
masses."

"All very fine, doctor," sneered the queen. "I do not despair of seeing
such a partisan of novelties coming some day to feel the king's pulse,
with the red cap on your head and a pike in your hand."

Seeing that she could not win with such a man, the queen retired, half
jesting, half bitter.

Princess Elizabeth was about to do the same, when Gilbert appealed to
her:

"You love your brother, do you not?"

"Love? The feeling is of adoration."

"Then you are ready to transmit good advice to him, coming from a
friend?"

"Then, speak, speak!"

"When his Feuillant Ministry falls, which will not take long, let him
take a ministry with all the members wearing this red cap, though it so
alarms the queen." And profoundly bowing, he went out.




CHAPTER III.

POWERFUL, PERHAPS; HAPPY, NEVER.


The Narbonne Ministry lasted three months. A speech of Vergniaud
blasted it. On the news that the Empress of Russia had made a treaty
with Turkey, and Austria and Prussia had signed an alliance, offensive
and defensive, he sprung into the rostrum and cried:

"I see the palace from here where this counter-revolution is scheming
those plots which aim to deliver us to Austria. The day has come when
you must put an end to so much audacity, and confound the plotters. Out
of that palace have issued panic and terror in olden times, in the
name of despotism--let them now rush into it in the name of the law!"

Dread and terror did indeed enter the Tuileries, whence De Narbonne,
wafted thither by a breath of love, was expelled by a gust of storm.
This downfall occurred at the beginning of March, 1792.

Scarce three months after the interview of Gilbert and the queen, a
small, active, nervy little man, with flaming eyes blazing in a bright
face, was ushered into King Louis' presence. He was aged fifty-six, but
appeared ten years younger, though his cheek was brown with camp-fire
smoke; he wore the uniform of a camp-marshal.

The king cast a dull and heavy glance on the little man, whom he had
never met; but it was not without observation. The other fixed on him a
scrutinizing eye full of fire and distrust.

"You are General Dumouriez? Count de Narbonne, I believe, called you to
Paris?"

"To announce that he gave me a division in the army in Alsace."

"But you did not join, it appears?"

"Sire, I accepted; but I felt that I ought to point out that as war
impended"--Louis started visibly--"and threatened to become general,"
went on the soldier, without appearing to remark the emotion, "I deemed
it good to occupy the south, where an attack might come unawares;
consequently, it seemed urgent to me that a plan for movements there
should be drawn up, and a general and army sent thither."

"Yes; and you gave this plan to Count de Narbonne, after showing it to
members of the Gironde?"

"They are friends of mine, as I believe they are of your majesty."

"Then I am dealing with a Girondist?" queried the monarch, smiling.

"With a patriot, and faithful subject of his king."

Louis bit his thick lips.

"Was it to serve the king and the country the more efficaciously that
you refused to be foreign minister for a time?"

"Sire, I replied that I preferred, to being any kind of minister, the
command promised me. I am a soldier, not a statesman."

"I have been assured, on the contrary, that you are both," observed the
sovereign.

"I am praised too highly, sire."

"It was on that assurance that I insisted."

"Yes, sire; but in spite of my great regret, I was obliged to persist
in refusing."

"Why refuse?"

"Because it is a crisis. It has upset De Narbonne and compromises
Lessart. Any man has the right to keep out of employment or be
employed, according to what he thinks he is fitted for. Now, my liege,
I am good for something or for nothing. If the latter, leave me in my
obscurity. Who knows for what fate you draw me forth? If I am good for
something, do not give me power for an instant, the premier of a day,
but place some solid footing under me that I may be your support at
another day. Our affairs--your majesty will pardon me already regarding
his business as mine--our affairs are in too great disfavor abroad for
courts to deal with an _ad interim_ ministry; this interregnum--you
will excuse the frankness of an old soldier"--no one was less frank
than Dumouriez, but he wanted to appear so at times--"this interval
will be a blunder against which the House will revolt, and it will make
me disliked there; more, I must say that it will injure the king, who
will seem still to cling to his former Cabinet, and only be waiting for
a chance to bring it back."

"Were that my intention, do you not believe it possible, sir?"

"I believe, sire, that it is full time to drop the past."

"And make myself a Jacobin, as you have said to my valet, Laporte?"

"Forsooth, did your majesty this, it would perplex all the parties, and
the Jacobins most of all."

"Why not straightway advise me to don the red cap?"

"I wish I saw you in it," said Dumouriez.

For an instant the king eyed with distrust the man who had thus replied
to him; and then he resumed:

"So you want a permanent office?"

"I am wishing nothing at all, only ready to receive the king's orders;
still, I should prefer them to send me to the frontier to retaining me
in town."

"But if I give you the order to stay, and the foreign office portfolio
in permanency, what will you say?"

"That your majesty has dispelled your prejudices against me," returned
the general, with a smile.

"Well, yes, entirely, general; you are my premier."

"Sire, I am devoted to your service; but--"

"Restrictions?"

"Explanations, sire. The first minister's place is not what it was.
Without ceasing to be your majesty's faithful servant on entering the
post, I become the man of the nation. From this day, do not expect
the language my predecessors used; I must speak according to the
Constitution and liberty. Confined to my duties, I shall not play the
courtier; I shall not have the time, and I drop all etiquette so as to
better serve the king. I shall only work with you in private or at the
council--and I warn you that it will be hard work."

"Hard work--why?"

"Why, it is plain; almost all your diplomatic corps are
anti-revolutionists. I must urge you to change them, cross your tastes
on the new choice, propose officials of whom your majesty never so much
as heard the names, and others who will displease."

"In which case?" quickly interrupted Louis.

"Then I shall obey when your majesty's repugnance is too strong and
well-founded, as you are the master; but if your choice is suggested
by your surroundings, and is clearly made to get me into trouble, I
shall entreat your majesty to find a successor for me. Sire, think of
the dreadful dangers besieging your throne, and that one must have the
public confidence in support; sire, this depends on you."

"Let me stay you a moment; I have long pondered over these dangers."
He stretched out his hand to the portrait of Charles I. of England,
by Vandyke, and continued, while wiping his forehead with his
handkerchief: "This would remind me, if I were to forget them. It is
the same situation, with similar dangers; perhaps the scaffold of
Whitehall is erecting on City Hall Place."

"You are looking too far ahead, my lord."

"Only to the horizon. In this event, I shall march to the scaffold
as Charles I. did, not perhaps as knightly, but at least as like a
Christian. Proceed, general."

Dumouriez was checked by this firmness, which he had not expected.

"Sire, allow me to change the subject."

"As you like; I only wish to show that I am not daunted by the prospect
they try to frighten me with, but that I am prepared for even this
emergency."

"If I am still regarded as your Minister of Foreign Affairs, I will
bring four dispatches to the first consul. I notify your majesty that
they will not resemble those of previous issue in style or principles;
they will suit the circumstances. If this first piece of work suits
your majesty, I will continue; if not, my carriage will be waiting to
carry me to serve king and country on the border; and, whatever may be
said about my diplomatic ability," added Dumouriez, "war is my true
element, and the object of my labors these thirty-six years."

"Wait," said the other, as he bowed before going out; "we agree on one
point, but there are six more to settle."

"My colleagues?"

"Yes; I do not want you to say that you are hampered by such a one.
Choose your Cabinet, sir."

"Sire, you are fixing grave responsibility on me."

"I believe I am meeting your wishes by putting it on you."

"Sire, I know nobody at Paris save one, Lacoste, whom I propose for the
navy office."

"Lacoste? A clerk in the naval stores, I believe?" questioned the king.

"Who resigned rather than connive at some foul play."

"That's a good recommendation. What about the others?'"

"I must consult Petion, Brissot, Condorcet--"

"The Girondists, in short?"

"Yes, sire."

"Let the Gironde pass; we shall see if they will get us out of the
ditch better than the other parties."

"We have still to learn if the four dispatches will suit."

"We might learn that this evening; we can hold an extraordinary
council, composed of yourself, Grave, and Gerville--Duport has
resigned. But do not go yet; I want to commit you."

He had hardly spoken before the queen and Princess Elizabeth stood in
the room, holding prayer-books.

"Ladies," said the king, "this is General Dumouriez, who promises to
serve us well, and will arrange a new Cabinet with us this evening."

Dumouriez bowed, while the queen looked hard at the little man who was
to exercise so much influence over the affairs of France.

"Do you know Doctor Gilbert?" she asked. "If not, make his acquaintance
as an excellent prophet. Three months ago he foretold that you would
be Count de Narbonne's successor."

The main doors opened, for the king was going to mass. Behind him
Dumouriez went out; but the courtiers shunned him as though he had the
leprosy.

"I told you I should get you committed," whispered the monarch.

"Committed to you, but not to the aristocracy," returned the warrior;
"it is a fresh favor the king grants me." Whereupon he retired.

At the appointed hour he returned with the four dispatches
promised--for Spain, Prussia, England, and Austria. He read them to
the king and Messieurs Grave and Gerville, but he guessed that he had
another auditor behind the tapestry by its shaking.

The new ruler spoke in the king's name, but in the sense of the
Constitution, without threats, but also without weakness. He discussed
the true interests of each power relatively to the French Revolution.
As each had complained of the Jacobin pamphlets, he ascribed the
despicable insults to the freedom of the press, a sun which made weeds
to grow as well as good grain to flourish. Lastly, he demanded peace
in the name of a free nation, of which the king was the hereditary
representative.

The listening king lent fresh interest to each paper.

"I never heard the like, general," he said, when the reading was over.

"That is how ministers should speak and write in the name of rulers,"
observed Gerville.

"Well, give me the papers; they shall go off to-morrow," the king said.

"Sire, the messengers are waiting in the palace yard," said Dumouriez.

"I wanted to have a duplicate made to show the queen," objected the
king, with marked hesitation.

"I foresaw the wish, and have copies here," replied Dumouriez.

"Send off the dispatches," rejoined the king.

The general took them to the door, behind which an aid was waiting.
Immediately the gallop of several horses was heard leaving the
Tuileries together.

"Be it so," said the king, replying to his mind, as the meaning sounds
died away. "Now, about your Cabinet?"

"Monsieur Gerville pleads that his health will not allow him to remain,
and Monsieur Grave, stung by a criticism of Madame Roland, wishes to
hold office until his successor is found. I therefore pray your majesty
to receive Colonel Servan, an honest man in the full acceptation of the
words, of a solid material, pure manners, philosophical austerity, and
a heart like a woman's, withal an enlightened patriot, a courageous
soldier, and a vigilant statesman."

"Colonel Servan is taken. So we have three ministers: Dumouriez for the
Foreign Office, Servan for War, and Lacoste for the Navy. Who shall be
in the Treasury?"

"Clavieres, if you will. He is a man with great financial friends and
supreme skill in handling money."

"Be it so. As for the Law lord?"

"A lawyer of Bordeaux has been recommended to me--Duranthon."

"Belonging to the Gironde party, of course?"

"Yes, sire, but enlightened, upright, a very good citizen, though slow
and feeble; we will infuse fire into him and be strong enough for all
of us."

"The Home Department remains."

"The general opinion is that this will be fitted to Roland."

"You mean Madame Roland?"

"To the Roland couple. I do not know them, but I am assured that the
one resembles a character of Plutarch and the other a woman from Livy."

"Do you know that your Cabinet is already called the Breechless
Ministry?"

"I accept the nickname, with the hope that it will be found without
_breaches_."

"We will hold the council with them the day after to-morrow."

General Dumouriez was going away with his colleagues, when a valet
called him aside and said that the king had something more to say to
him.

"The king or the queen?" he questioned.

"It is the queen, sir; but she thought there was no need for those
gentlemen to know that."

And Weber--for this was the Austrian foster-brother of Marie
Antoinette--conducted the general to the queen's apartments, where he
introduced him as the person sent for.

Dumouriez entered, with his heart beating more violently than when he
led a charge or mounted the deadly breach. He fully understood that he
had never stood in worse danger. The road he traveled was strewn with
corpses, and he might stumble over the dead reputations of premiers,
from Calonne to Lafayette.

The queen was walking up and down, with a very red face. She advanced
with a majestic and irritated air as he stopped on the sill where the
door had been closed behind him.

"Sir, you are all-powerful at this juncture," she said, breaking the
ice with her customary vivacity. "But it is by favor of the populace,
who soon shatter their idols. You are said to have much talent. Have
the wit, to begin with, to understand that the king and I will not
suffer novelties. Your constitution is a pneumatic machine; royalty
stifles in it for want of air. So I have sent for you to learn, before
you go further, whether you side with us or with the Jacobins."

"Madame," responded Dumouriez, "I am pained by this confidence,
although I expected it, from the impression that your majesty was
behind the tapestry."

"Which means that you have your reply ready?"

"It is that I stand between king and country, but before all I belong
to the country."

"The country?" sneered the queen. "Is the king no longer anything, that
everybody belongs to the country and none to him?"

"Excuse me, lady; the king is always the king, but he has taken oath
to the Constitution, and from that day he should be one of the first
slaves of the Constitution."

"A compulsory oath, and in no way binding, sir!"

Dumouriez held his tongue for a space, and, being a consummate actor,
he regarded the speaker with deep pity.

"Madame," he said, at length, "allow me to say that your safety, the
king's, your children's, all, are attached to this Constitution which
you deride, and which will save you, if you consent to be saved by it.
I should serve you badly, as well as the king, if I spoke otherwise to
you."

The queen interrupted him with an imperious gesture.

"Oh, sir, sir, I assure you that you are on the wrong path!" she
said; adding, with an indescribable accent of threat: "Take heed for
yourself!"

"Madame," replied Dumouriez, in a perfectly calm tone, "I am over fifty
years of age; my life has been traversed with perils, and on taking the
ministry I said to myself that ministerial responsibility was not the
slightest danger I ever ran."

"Fy, sir!" returned the queen, slapping her hands together; "you have
nothing more to do than to slander me?"

"Slander you, madame?"

"Yes; do you want me to explain the meaning of the words I used? It is
that I am capable of having you assassinated. For shame, sir!"

Tears escaped from her eyes. Dumouriez had gone as far as she wanted;
he knew that some sensitive fiber remained in that indurated heart.

"Lord forbid I should so insult my queen!" he cried. "The nature of
your majesty is too grand and noble for the worst of her enemies to be
inspired with such an idea, she has given heroic proofs which I have
admired, and which attached me to her."

"Then excuse me, and lend me your arm. I am so weak that I often fear I
shall fall in a swoon."

Turning pale, she indeed drooped her head backward. Was it reality, or
only one of the wiles in which this fearful Medea was so skilled? Keen
though the general was, he was deceived; or else, more cunning than the
enchantress, he feigned to be caught.

"Believe me, madame," he said, "that I have no interest in cheating
you. I abhor anarchy and crime as much as yourself. Believe, too,
that I have experience, and am better placed than your majesty to see
events. What is transpiring is not an intrigue of the Duke of Orleans,
as you are led to think; not the effect of Pitt's hatred, as you have
supposed; not even the outcome of popular impulse, but the almost
unanimous insurrection of a great nation against inveterate abuses.
I grant that there is in all this great hates which fan the flames.
Leave the lunatics and the villains on one side; let us see nothing in
this revolution in progress but the king and the nation, all tending
to separate them brings about their mutual ruin. I come, my lady, to
work my utmost to reunite them; aid me, instead of thwarting me. You
mistrust me? Am I an obstacle to your anti-revolutionary projects? Tell
me so, madame, I will forthwith hand my resignation to the king, and go
and wail the fate of my country and its ruler in some nook."

"No, no," said the queen; "remain, and excuse me."

"Do you ask me to excuse you? Oh, madame, I entreat you not to humble
yourself thus."

"Why should I not be humble? Am I still a queen? am I yet treated like
a woman?"

Going to the window, she opened it in spite of the evening coolness;
the moon silvered the leafless trees of the palace gardens.

"Are not the air and the sunshine free to all? Well, these are refused
to me; I dare not put my head out of window, either on the street or
the gardens. Yesterday I did look out on the yard, when a Guards gunner
hailed me with an insulting nickname, and said: 'How I should like to
carry your head on a bayonet-point.' This morning, I opened the garden
window. A man standing on a chair was reading infamous stuff against
me; a priest was dragged to a fountain to be ducked; and meanwhile,
as though such scenes were matters of course, children were sailing
their balloons and couples were strolling tranquilly. What times we are
living in--what a place to live in--what a people! And would you have
me still believe myself a queen, and even feel like a woman?"

She threw herself on a sofa, and hid her face in her hands.

Dumouriez dropped on one knee, and taking up the hem of her dress
respectfully, he kissed it.

"Lady," he said, "from the time when I undertake this struggle, you
will become the mighty queen and the happy woman once more, or I shall
leave my life on the battle-field."

Rising, he saluted the lady and hurried out. She watched him go with a
hopeless look, repeating:

"The mighty queen? Perhaps, thanks to your sword--for it is possible;
but the happy woman--never, never, never!"

She let her head fall between the sofa cushions, muttering the name
dearer every day and more painful:

"Charny!"

The Dumouriez Cabinet might be called one of war.

On the first of March, the Emperor Leopold died in the midst of his
Italian harem, slain by self-compounded aphrodisiacs. The queen, who
had read in some lampoon that a penny pie would settle the monarchy,
and who had called Dr. Gilbert in to get an antidote, cried aloud that
her brother was poisoned. With him passed all the halting policy of
Austria.

Francis II., who mounted the throne, was of mixed Italian and German
blood. An Austrian born at Florence, he was weak, violent, and tricky.
The priests reckoned him an honest man; his hard and bigoted soul
hid its duplicity under a rosy face of dreadful sameness. He walked
like a stage ghost; he gave his daughter to a conqueror rather than
part with his estate, and then stabbed him in the back at his first
retreating step in the snows. Francis II. remains in history the tyrant
of the Leads of Venice and the Spitzberg dungeons, and the torturer of
Andryane and Silvio Pellico.

This was the protector of the French fugitives, the ally of Prussia
and the enemy of France. He held Embassador Noailles as a prisoner at
Vienna.

The French embassador to Berlin, Segur, was preceded by a rumor that he
expected to gain the secrets of the King of Prussia by making love to
his mistresses--this King of Prussia was a lady-killer! Segur presented
himself at the same time as the envoy from the self-exiled princes at
Coblentz.

The king turned his back on the French representative, and asked
pointedly after the health of the Prince of Artois.

These were the two ostensible foes; the hidden ones were Spain, Russia,
and England. The chief of the coalition was to be the King of Sweden,
that dwarf in giant's armor whom Catherine II. held up in her hand.

With the ascension of Francis, the diplomatic note came: Austria was to
rule in France, Avignon was to be restored to the pope, and things in
France were to go back to where they stood in June, 1789.

This note evidently agreed with the secret wishes of the king and the
queen. Dumouriez laughed at it. But he took it to the king.

As much as Marie Antoinette, the woman for extreme measures, desired
a war which she believed one of deliverance for her, the king feared
it, as the man for the medium, slowness, wavering, and crooked policy.
Indeed, suppose a victory in the war, he would be at the mercy of the
victorious general; suppose a defeat, and the people would hold him
responsible, cry treason, and rush on the palace!

In short, should the enemy penetrate to Paris, what would it bring?
The king's brother, Count Provence, who aimed to be regent of the
realm. The result of the return of the runaway princes would be the
king deposed, Marie Antoinette pronounced an adulteress, and the royal
children proclaimed, perhaps, illegitimate.

The king trusted foreigners, but not the princes of his own blood and
kingdom.

On reading the note, he comprehended that the hour to draw the sword
for France had come, and that there was no receding.

Who was to bear the flag of the revolution? Lafayette, who had lost his
fame by massacring the populace on the Paris parade-ground; Luckner,
who was known only by the mischief he wrought in the Seven Years' War,
and old Rochambeau, the French naval hero in the American Revolution,
who was for defensive war, and was vexed to see Dumouriez promote young
blood over his head without benefiting by his experience.

It was expected that Lafayette would be victorious in the north; when
he would be commander-in-chief, Dumouriez would be the Minister of War;
they would cast down the red cap and crush Jacobins and Girondists with
the two hands.

The counter-revolution was ready.

But what were Robespierre and the Invisibles doing--that great secret
society which held the agitators in its grasp as Jove holds the
writhing thunder-bolts? Robespierre was in the shade, and many asserted
that he was bribed by the royal family.

At the outset all went well for the Royalists; Lafayette's lieutenants,
two Royalists, Dillon and Biron, headed a rout before Lille; the
scouts, dragoons, still the most aristocratic arm of the service,
turned tail and started a panic. The runaways accused the captains of
treachery, and murdered Dillon and other officers. The Gironde accused
the queen and Court party of organizing the flight.

The popular clamor compelled Marie Antoinette to let the Constitutional
Guard be abolished--another name for a royal life-guard--and it was
superseded by the Paris National Guards.

Oh! Charny, Charny, where were you?--you who, at Varennes, nearly
rescued the queen with but three hundred horsemen--what would you not
have done at Paris with six thousand desperadoes?

Charny was happy, forgetting everything in the arms of his countess.




CHAPTER IV.

THE FOES FACE TO FACE.


While the queen was looking from the palace to see the Austrians
coming, another was watching in her little reception-rooms. One was
revolution embodied, the other its opponents intensified; that was
Madame Roland, this the queen from Austria.

The real war at this period was between this pair.

A singular thing, both had such influence over their husbands as to
lead them to death, although by different roads.

Dumouriez had thrown a sop to the Jacobins without knowing who the
Colonel Servan was whom he took for Minister of War. He was a favorite
of Madame Roland. Like all the Girondists, of whom she was the light,
the fire, the egeria, he was inspired by that valiant spirit.

But he and Roland were neutralized at the council by Dumouriez. They
had forced the Royalist Constitutional Guards to disband, but they had
merely changed their uniform for that of the Swiss Guards, the sworn
defenders of royalty, and swaggered about the streets more insolently
than before.

Madame Roland suggested that, on the occasion of the July festivals,
a camp of twenty thousand volunteers should be established in Paris.
Servan was to present this as a citizen, apart from his being a
minister. In the same way, Roland was to punish the rebellious priests
who were preaching from the pulpits that taxpayers would be damned, by
ordering their exile.

Dumouriez supported the volunteer proposition at the council, in the
hope that the new-comers would be Jacobins; that is, the Invisibles, by
whom neither the Girondists nor the Feuillants would profit.

"If your majesty vetoes it," he said, firmly, "instead of the twenty
thousand authorized, we shall have forty thousand unruly spirits in
town, who may with one rush upset Constitution, Assembly, and the
throne. Had we been vanquishers--But we must give in--I say accept."

But the queen urged the king to stand firm. As we know, she would
rather be lost than be saved by Lafayette.

As for the decree against the priests, it was another matter. The king
said that he wavered in temporal questions as he judged them with his
mind, which was fallible; but he tried religious matters with his
conscience, which was infallible!

But they could not dispense with Dumouriez at this juncture.

"Accept the volunteer act," said the queen, at last; "let the camp be
at Soissons, where the general says he will gradually draft them off
out of the way; and--well, we will see about the decree aimed at the
priests. Dumouriez has your promise, but there must be some way of
evading the issue when you are the Jesuits' pupil!"

Roland, Servan, and Clavieres resigned, and the Assembly applauded
their act as deserving the thanks of the country.

Hearing of this, and that Dumouriez was badly compromised, the pupil of
Vauguyon agreed to the Volunteer Camp Bill, but pleading conscientious
scruples, deferred signing the decree banishing the refractory
priests. This made the new ministers wince, and Dumouriez went away
sore at heart. The king had almost succeeded in baffling him, the
fine diplomatist, sharp politician, and the general whose courage was
doubled by intrigue!

He found at home the spies' reports that the Invisibles were holding
meetings in the working quarters, and openly at Santerre's brewery. He
wrote to warn the king, whose answer was:

"Do not believe that I can be bullied; my mind is made up."

Dumouriez replied, asking for an audience, and requested his successor
to be sought for. It was clear that the anti-revolutionist party felt
strong.

Indeed, they were reckoning on the following forces:

The Constitutional Guards, six thousand strong, disbanded, but ready
to fly to arms at the first call; seven or eight thousand Knights of
the Order of St. Louis, whose red ribbon was the rallying token; three
battalions of Switzers, sixteen hundred men, picked soldiers, unshaken
as the old Helvetic rocks.

Better than all, Lafayette had written: "Persist, sire; fortified with
the authority the National Assembly has delegated to you, you will find
all good citizens on your side!"

The plan was to gather all the forces at a given signal, seize the
cannon of each section of Paris, shut up the Jacobin's Club-house and
the Assembly, add all the Royalists in the National Guard, say, a
contingent of fifteen thousand men, and wait for Lafayette, who might
march up in three days.

The misfortune was that the queen would not hear of Lafayette.
Lafayette was merely the Revolution moderated, and might prolong it and
lead to a republic like that he had brought round in America; while the
Jacobins' outrageous rule would sicken the people and could not endure.

Oh, had Charny been at hand! But it was not even known where he was;
and were it known, it would be too low an abasement for the woman, if
not the queen, to have recourse to him.

The night passed tumultuously at the palace, where they had the means
of defense and attack, but not a hand strong enough to grasp and hurl
them.

Dumouriez and his colleagues came to resign. They affirmed they were
willing to die for the king, but to do this for the clergy would only
precipitate the downfall of the monarchy.

"Sire," pleaded Dumouriez, "your conscience is misled; you are beguiled
into civil war. Without strength, you must succumb, and history, while
sorrowing for you, will blame you for causing the woes of France."

"Heaven be my witness that I wished but her happiness!"

"I do not doubt that; but one must account to the King of kings not
only for purity of intentions, but the enlightened use of intentions.
You suppose you are saving religion, but you will destroy it; your
priests will be massacred; your broken crown will roll in your blood,
the queen's, your children's, perhaps--oh, my king, my king!"

Choking, he applied his lips to the royal hand. With perfect serenity,
and a majesty of which he might not be believed capable, Louis replied.

"You are right, general. I expect death, and forgive my murderers
beforehand. You have well served me; I esteem you, and am affected by
your sympathy. Farewell, sir!"

With Dumouriez going, royalty had parted with its last stay. The king
threw off the mask, and stood with uncovered face before the people.

Let us see what the people were doing on their side.




CHAPTER V.

THE UNINVITED VISITORS.


All day long a man in general's uniform was riding about the St.
Antoine suburb, on a large Flanders horse, shaking hands right and
left, kissing the girls and treating the men to drink. This was one of
Lafayette's half dozen heirs, the small-change of the commander of the
National Guard--Battalion Commander Santerre.

Beside him rode, on a fiery charger, like an aid next his general, a
stout man who might by his dress be taken to be a well-to-do farmer. A
scar tracked his brow, and he had as gloomy an eye and scowling a face
as the battalion commander had an open countenance and frank smile.

"Get ready, my good friends; watch over the nation, against which
traitors are plotting. But we are on guard," Santerre kept saying.

"What are we to do, friend Santerre?" asked the working-men. "You know
that we are all your own. Where are the traitors? Lead us at them!"

"Wait; the proper time has not come."

"When will it strike?"

Santerre did not know a word about it; so he replied at a hazard, "Keep
ready; we'll let you know."

But the man who rode by his knee, bending down over the horse's neck,
would make signs to some men, and whisper:

"June twenty."

Whereupon these men would call groups of twenty or so around each, and
repeat the date to them, so that it would be circulated. Nobody knew
what would be done on the twentieth of June, but all felt sure that
something would happen on that day.

By whom was this mob moved, stirred, and excited? By a man of powerful
build, leonine mane, and roaring voice, whom Santerre was to find
waiting in his brewery office--Danton.

None better than this terrible wizard of the Revolution could evoke
terror from the slums and hurl it into the old palace of Catherine di
Medicis. Danton was the gong of riots; the blow he received he imparted
vibratingly to all the multitude around him. Through Hebert he was
linked to the populace, as by the Duke of Orleans he was affixed to the
throne.

Whence came his power, doomed to be so fatal to royalty? To the queen,
the spiteful Austrian who had not liked Lafayette to be mayor of Paris,
but preferred Petion, the Republican, who had no sooner brought back
the fugitive king to the Tuileries than he set to watch him closely.

Petion had made his two friends, Manuel and Danton, the Public
Prosecutor and the Vice, respectively.

On the twentieth of June, under the pretext of presenting a petition to
the king and raising a liberty pole, the palace was to be stormed.

The adepts alone knew that France was to be saved from the Lafayettes
and the Moderates, and a warning to be given to the incorrigible
monarch that there are some political tempests in which a vessel may
be swamped with all hands aboard; that is, a king be overwhelmed with
throne and family as in the oceanic abysses.

Billet knew more than Santerre when he accompanied him on his tour,
after presenting himself as from the committee.

Danton called on the brewer to arrange for the meeting of the popular
leaders that night at Charenton for the march on the morrow, presumably
to the House, but really to the Tuileries.

The watchword was, "Have done with the palace!" but the way remained
vague.

On the evening of the nineteenth, the queen saw a woman clad in
scarlet, with a belt full of pistols, gallop, bold and terrible, along
the main streets. It was Theroigne Mericourt, the beauty of Liege, who
had gone back to her native country to help its rebellion; but the
Austrians had caught her and kept her imprisoned for eighteen months.

She returned mysteriously to be at the bloody feast of the coming day.
The courtesan of opulence, she was now the beloved of the people; from
her noble lovers had come the funds for her costly weapons, which were
not all for show. Hence the mob hailed her with cheers.

From the Tuileries garret, where the queen had climbed on hearing the
uproar, she saw tables set out in the public squares and wine broached;
patriotic songs were sung and at every toast fists were shaken at the
palace.

Who were the guests? The Federals of Marseilles, led by Barbaroux, who
brought with them the song worth an army--"the Marseillaise Hymn of
Liberty."

Day breaks early in June. At five o'clock the battalions were
marshaled, for the insurrection was regularized by this time and had a
military aspect. The mob had chiefs, submitted to discipline, and fell
into assigned places under flags.

Santerre was on horseback, with his staff of men from the working
district. Billet did not leave him, for the occult power of the
Invisibles charged him to watch over him.

Of the three corps into which the forces were divided, Santerre
commanded the first, St. Huruge the second, and Theroigne the last.

About eleven, on an order brought by an unknown man, the immense mass
started out. It numbered some twenty thousand when it left the Bastile
Square.

It had a wild, odd, and horrible look.

Santerre's battalion was the most regular, having many in uniform, and
muskets and bayonets among the weapons. But the other two were armed
mobs, haggard, thin, and in rags from three years of revolutions and
four of famine.

Neither had uniforms nor muskets, but tattered coats and smocks; quaint
arms snatched up in the first impulse of self-defense and anger: pikes,
cooking-spits, jagged spears, hiltless swords, knives lashed to long
poles, broad-axes, stone-masons' hammers and curriers' knives.

For standards, a gallows with a dangling doll, meant for the queen; a
bull's head, with an obscene card stuck on the horns; a calf's heart
on a spit, with the motto: "An Aristocrat's;" while flags showed the
legends: "Sanction the decrees, or death!"--"Recall the patriotic
ministers!"--"Tremble, tyrant; your hour has come!"

At every crossing and from each by-way the army was swollen.

The mass was silent, save now and then when a cheer burst from the
midst, or a snatch of the "It shall go on" was sung, or cries went up
of "The nation forever!"--"Long live the Breechless!"--"Down with Old
Veto and Madame Veto!"

They came out for sport--to frighten the king and queen, and did not
mean murdering. They demanded to march past the Assembly through
the Hall, and for three hours they defiled under the eyes of their
representatives.

It was three o'clock. The mob had obtained half their programme, the
placing of their petition before the Assembly. The next thing was to
call on the king for his sanction to the decree.

As the Assembly had received them, how could the king refuse? Surely he
was not a greater potentate than the Speaker of the House, whose chair
was like his and in the grander place?

In fact, the king assented to receiving their deputation of twenty.

As the common people had never entered the palace, they merely expected
their representatives would be received while they marched by under the
windows. They would show the king their banners with the odd devices
and the gory standards.

All the palace garden gates were closed; in the yards and gardens
were soldiers with four field-pieces. Seeing this apparently ample
protection, the royal family might be tranquil.

Still without any evil idea, the crowd asked for the gates to be opened
which allowed entrance on the Feuillants Terrace.

Three municipal officers went in and got leave from the king for
passage to be given over the terrace and out by the stable doors.

Everybody wanted to go in as soon as the gates were open, and the
throng spread over the lawn; it was forgotten to open the outlet by the
stables, and the crush began to be severe. They streamed before the
National Guards in a row along the palace wall to the Carrousel gates,
by which they might have resumed the homeward route. They were locked
and guarded.

Sweltering, crushed, and turned about, the mob began to be irritated.
Before its growls the gates were opened and the men spread over the
capacious square.

There they remembered what the main affair was--to petition the king
to revoke his veto. Instead of continuing the road, they waited in the
square for an hour, when they grew impatient.

They might have gone away, but that was not the aim of the agitators,
who went from group to group, saying:

"Stay; what do you want to sneak away for? The king is going to give
his sanction; if we were to go home without that, we should have all
our work to do over again."

The level-headed thought this sensible advice, but at the same time
that the sanction was a long time coming. They were getting hungry, and
that was the general cry.

Bread was not so dear as it had been, but there was no work going on,
and however cheap bread may be, it is not made for nothing.

Everybody had risen at five, workmen and their wives, with their
children, and come to the palace with the idea that they had but to get
the royal sanction to have hard times end. But the king did not seem to
be at all eager to give his sanction.

It was hot, and thirst began to be felt. Hunger, thirst, and heat drive
dogs mad; yet the poor people waited and kept patient. But those next
to the railings set to shaking them. A municipal officer made a speech
to them:

"Citizens, this is the king's residence, and to enter with arms is to
violate it. The king is quite ready to receive your petition, but only
from twenty deputies bearing it."

What! had not their deputation, sent in an hour ago, been attended to
yet?

Suddenly loud shouts were heard on the streets. It was Santerre,
Billet, and Huruge on their horses, and Theroigne riding on her cannon.

"What are you fellows hanging round this gate for?" queried Huruge.
"Why do you not go right in?"

"Just so; why haven't we?" said the thousands.

"Can't you see it is fast?" cried several voices.

Theroigne jumped off her cannon, saying:

"The barker is full to the muzzle; let's blow the old gate open."

"Wait! wait!" shouted two municipal officers; "no roughness. It shall
be opened to you."

Indeed, by pressing on the spring-catch they released the two gates,
which drew aside, and the mass rushed through.

Along with them came the cannon, which crossed the yard with them,
mounted the steps, and reached the head of the stairs in their company.
Here stood the city officials in their scarfs of office.

"What do you intend doing with a piece of artillery?" they challenged.
"Great guns in the royal apartments! Do you believe anything is to be
gained by such violence?"

"Quite right," said the ringleaders, astonished themselves to see the
gun there; and they turned it round to get it down-stairs. The hub
caught on the jamb, and the muzzle gaped on the crowd.

"Why, hang them all, they have got cannon all over the palace!"
commented the new-comers, not knowing their own artillery.

Police-Magistrate Mouchet, a deformed dwarf, ordered the men to chop
the wheel clear, and they managed to hack the door-jamb away so as
to free the piece, which was taken down to the yard. This led to the
report that the mob were smashing all the doors in.

Some two hundred noblemen ran to the palace, not with the hope of
defending it, but to die with the king, whose life they deemed menaced.
Prominent among these was a man in black, who had previously offered
his breast to the assassin's bullet, and who always leaped like a last
Life-Guard between danger and the king, from whom he had tried to
conjure it. This was Gilbert.

After being excited by the frightful tumult, the king and queen became
used to it.

It was half past three, and it was hoped that the day would close with
no more harm done.

Suddenly, the sound of the ax blows was heard above the noise of
clamor, like the howling of a coming tempest. A man darted into the
king's sleeping-room and called out:

"Sire, let me stand by you, and I will answer for all."

It was Dr. Gilbert, seen at almost periodical intervals, and in all the
"striking situations" of the tragedy in play.

"Oh, doctor, is this you? What is it?" King and queen spoke together.

"The palace is surrounded, and the people are making this uproar in
wanting to see you."

"We shall not leave you, sire," said the queen and Princess Elizabeth.

"Will the king kindly allow me for an hour such power as a captain has
over his ship?" asked Gilbert.

"I grant it," replied the monarch. "Madame, hearken to Doctor Gilbert's
advice, and obey his orders, if needs must." He turned to the doctor:
"Will you answer to me for the queen and the dauphin?"

"I do, or I shall die with them; it is all a pilot can say in the
tempest!"

The queen wished to make a last effort, but Gilbert barred the way with
his arms.

"Madame," he said, "it is you and not the king who run the real
danger. Rightly or wrongly, they accuse you of the king's resistance,
so that your presence will expose him without defending him. Be the
lightning-conductor--divert the bolt, if you can!"

"Then let it fall on me, but save my children!"

"I have answered for you and them to the king. Follow me."

He said the same to Princess Lamballe, who had returned lately from
London, and the other ladies, and guided them to the Council Hall,
where he placed them in a window recess, with the heavy table before
them.

The queen stood behind her children--Innocence protecting Unpopularity,
although she wished it to be the other way.

"All is well thus," said Gilbert, in the tone of a general commanding a
decisive operation; "do not stir."

There came a pounding at the door, which he threw open with both folds,
and as he knew there were many women in the crowd, he cried:

"Walk in, citizenesses; the queen and her children await you."

The crowd burst in as through a broken dam.

"Where is the Austrian? where is the Lady Veto?" demanded five hundred
voices.

It was the critical moment.

"Be calm," said Gilbert to the queen, knowing that all was in Heaven's
hand, and man was as nothing. "I need not recommend you to be kind."

Preceding the others was a woman with her hair down, who brandished a
saber; she was flushed with rage--perhaps from hunger.

"Where is the Austrian cat? She shall die by no hand but mine!" she
screamed.

"This is she," said Gilbert, taking her by the hand and leading her up
to the queen.

"Have I ever done you a personal wrong?" demanded the latter, in her
sweetest voice.

"I can not say you have," faltered the woman of the people, amazed at
the majesty and gentleness of Marie Antoinette.

"Then why should you wish to kill me?"

"Folks told me that you were the ruin of the nation," faltered the
abashed young woman, lowering the point of her saber to the floor.

"Then you were told wrong. I married your King of France, and am
mother of the prince whom you see here. I am a French woman, one who
will nevermore see the land where she was born; in France alone I must
dwell, happy or unhappy. Alas! I was happy when you loved me." And she
sighed.

The girl dropped the sword, and wept.

"Beg your pardon, madame, but I did not know what you were like. I see
you are a good sort, after all."

"Keep on like that," prompted Gilbert, "and not only will you be saved,
but all these people will be at your feet in an hour."

Intrusting her to some National Guardsmen and the War Minister, who
came in with the mob, he ran to the king.

Louis had gone through a similar experience. On hastening toward the
crowd, as he opened the Bull's-eye Room, the door panels were dashed
in, and pikes, bayonets, and axes showed their points and edges.

"Open the doors!" cried the king.

Servants heaped up chairs before him, and four grenadiers stood in
front, but he made them put up their swords, as the flash of steel
might seem a provocation.

A ragged fellow, with a knife-blade set in a pole, darted at the king,
yelling:

"Take that for your veto!"

One grenadier, who had not yet sheathed his sword, struck down the
stick with the blade. But it was the king who, entirely recovering
self-command, put the soldier aside with his hand, and said:

"Let me stand forward, sir. What have I to fear amid my people?"

Taking a forward step, Louis XVI., with a majesty not expected in him,
and a courage strange heretofore in him, offered his breast to the
weapons of all sorts directed against him.

"Hold your noise!" thundered a stentorian voice in the midst of the
awful din. "I want a word in here."

A cannon might have vainly sought to be heard in this clamor, but at
this voice all the vociferation ceased. This was the butcher Legendre.
He went up almost to touching the king, while they formed a ring round
the two.

Just then, on the outer edge of the circle, a man made his appearance,
and behind the dread double of Danton, the king recognized Gilbert,
pale and serene of face. The questioning glance implying: "What have
you done with the queen?" was answered by the doctor's smile to the
effect that she was in safety. He thanked him with a nod.

"Sirrah," began Legendre.

This expression, which seemed to indicate that the sovereign was
already deposed, made the latter turn as if a snake had stung him.

"Yes, sir, I am talking to you, Veto," went on Legendre. "Just listen
to us, for it is our turn to have you hear us. You are a double-dealer,
who have always cheated us, and would try it again, so look out for
yourself. The measure is full, and the people are tired of being your
plaything and victim."

"Well, I am listening to you, sir," rejoined the king.

"And a good thing, too. Do you know what we have come here for? To ask
the sanction of the decrees and the recall of the ministers. Here is
our petition--see!"

Taking a paper from his pocket, he unfolded it, and read the same
menacing lines which had been heard in the House. With his eyes fixed
on the speaker, the king listened, and said, when it was ended, without
the least apparent emotion:

"Sir, I shall do what the laws and the Constitution order me to do!"

"Gammon!" broke in a voice; "the Constitution is your high horse, which
lets you block the road of the whole country, to keep France in-doors,
for fear of being trampled on, and wait till the Austrians come up to
cut her throat."

The king turned toward this fresh voice, comprehending that it was a
worse danger. Gilbert also made a movement and laid his hand on the
speaker's shoulder.

"I have seen you somewhere before, friend," remarked the king. "Who are
you?"

He looked with more curiosity than fear, though this man wore a front
of terrible resolution.

"Ay, you have seen me before, sire. Three times: once, when you were
brought back from Versailles; next at Varennes; and the last time,
here. Sire, bear my name in mind, for it is of ill omen. It is Billet."

At this the shouting was renewed, and a man with a lance tried to stab
the king; but Billet seized the weapon, tore it from the wielder's
grip, and snapped it across his knee.

"No foul play," he said; "only one kind of steel has the right to touch
this man: the ax of the executioner! I hear that a King of England had
his head cut off by the people whom he betrayed--you ought to know his
name, Louis. Don't you forget it."

"'Sh, Billet!" muttered Gilbert.

"Oh, you may say what you like," returned Billet, shaking his head;
"this man is going to be tried and doomed as a traitor."

"Yes, a traitor!" yelled a hundred voices; "traitor, traitor!"

Gilbert threw himself in between.

"Fear nothing, sire, and try by some material token to give
satisfaction to these mad men."

Taking the physician's hand, the king laid it on his heart.

"You see that I fear nothing," he said; "I received the sacraments this
morning. Let them do what they like with me. As for the material sign
which you suggest I should display--are you satisfied?"

Taking the red cap from a by-stander, he set it on his own head. The
multitude burst into applause.

"Hurrah for the king!" shouted all the voices.

A fellow broke through the crowd and held up a bottle.

"If fat old Veto loves the people as much as he says, prove it by
drinking our health."

"Do not drink," whispered a voice. "It may be poisoned."

"Drink, sire, I answer for the honesty," said Gilbert.

The king took the bottle, and saying, "To the health of the people," he
drank. Fresh cheers for the king resounded.

"Sire, you have nothing to fear," said Gilbert; "allow me to return to
the queen."

"Go," said the other, gripping his hand.

More tranquil, the doctor hastened to the Council Hall, where he
breathed still easier after one glance. The queen stood in the same
spot; the little prince, like his father, was wearing the red cap.

In the next room was a great hubbub; it was the reception of Santerre,
who rolled into the hall.

"Where is this Austrian wench?" demanded he.

Gilbert cut slanting across the hall to intercept him.

"Halloo, Doctor Gilbert!" said he, quite joyfully.

"Who has not forgotten that you were one of those who opened the
Bastile doors to me," replied the doctor. "Let me present you to the
queen."

"Present me to the queen?" growled the brewer.

"You will not refuse, will you?"

"Faith, I'll not. I was going to introduce myself; but as you are in
the way--"

"Monsieur Santerre needs no introduction," interposed the queen. "I
know how at the famine time he fed at his sole expense half the St.
Antoine suburb."

Santerre stopped, astonished; then, his glance happening to fall,
embarrassed, on the dauphin, whose perspiration was running down his
cheeks, he roared:

"Here, take that sweater off the boy--don't you see he is smothering?"

The queen thanked him with a look. He leaned on the table, and bending
toward her, he said in an under-tone:

"You have a lot of clumsy friends, madame. I could tell you of some who
would serve you better."

An hour afterward all the mob had flowed away, and the king,
accompanied by his sister, entered the room where the queen and his
children awaited him.

She ran to him and threw herself at his feet, while the children
seized his hands, and all acted as though they had been saved from a
shipwreck. It was only then that the king noticed that he was wearing
the red cap.

"Faugh!" he said; "I had forgotten!"

Snatching it off with both hands, he flung it far from him with disgust.

The evacuation of the palace was as dull and dumb as the taking had
been gleeful and noisy. Astonished at the little result, the mob said:

"We have not made anything; we shall have to come again."

In fact, it was too much for a threat, and not enough for an attempt on
the king's life.

Louis had been judged on his reputation, and recalling his flight to
Varennes, disguised as a serving-man, they had thought that he would
hide under a table at the first noise, and might be done to death in
the scuffle, like Polonius behind the arras.

Things had happened otherwise; never had the monarch been calmer, never
so grand. In the height of the threats and the insults he had not
ceased to say: "Behold your king!"

The Royalists were delighted, for, to tell the truth, they had carried
the day.




CHAPTER VI.

"THE COUNTRY IS IN DANGER!"


The king wrote to the Assembly to complain of the violation of his
residence, and he issued a proclamation to "his people." So it appeared
there were two peoples--the king's, and those he complained of.

On the twenty-fourth, the king and queen were cheered by the National
Guards, whom they were reviewing, and on this same day, the Paris
Directory suspended Mayor Petion, who had told the king to his face
that the city was not riotous.

Whence sprung such audacity?

Three days after, the murder was out.

Lafayette came to beard the Assembly in its House, taunted by a member,
who had said, when he wrote to encourage the king in his opposition and
to daunt the representatives:

"He is very saucy in the midst of his army; let us see if he would talk
as big if he stood among us."

He escaped censure by a nominal majority--a victory worse than a defeat.

Lafayette had again sacrificed his popularity for the Royalists.

He cherished a last hope. With the enthusiasm to be kindled among
the National Guards by the king and their old commander, he proposed
to march on the Assembly and put down the Opposition, while in the
confusion the king should gain the camp at Maubeuge.

It was a bold scheme, but was almost sure in the state of minds.

Unfortunately, Danton ran to Petion at three in the morning with the
news, and the review was countermanded.

Who had betrayed the king and the general? The queen, who had said she
would rather be lost than owe safety to Lafayette.

She was helping fate, for she was doomed to be slain by Danton.

But supposing she had less spite, and the Girondists might have been
crushed. They were determined not to be caught napping another time.

It was necessary to restore the revolutionary current to its old
course, for it had been checked and was running up-stream.

The soul of the party, Mme. Roland, hoped to do this by rousing the
Assembly. She chose the orator Vergniaud to make the appeal, and
in a splendid speech, he shouted from the rostrum what was already
circulating in an under-tone:

"The country is in danger!"

The effect was like a waterspout; the whole House, even to the
Royalists, spectators, officials, all were enveloped and carried away
by this mighty cyclone; all roared with enthusiasm.

That same evening Barbaroux wrote to his friend Rebecqui, at Marseilles:

"Send me five hundred men eager to die."

On the eleventh of July, the Assembly declared the country to be in
danger, but the king withheld his authorization until the twenty-first,
late at night. Indeed, this call to arms was an admission that the
ruler was impotent, for the nation would not be asked to help herself
unless the king could or would do nothing.

Great terror made the palace quiver in the interval, as a plot was
expected to break out on the fourteenth, the anniversary of the taking
of the Bastile--a holiday.

Robespierre had sent an address out from the Jacobin Club which
suggested regicide.

So persuaded was the Court party, that the king was induced to wear a
shirt of mail to protect him against the assassin's knife, and Mme.
Campan had another for the queen, who refused to don it.

"I should be only too happy if they would slay me," she observed, in
a low voice. "Oh, God, they would do me a greater kindness than Thou
didst in giving me life! they would relieve me of a burden!"

Mme. Campan went out, choking. The king, who was in the corridor, took
her by the hand and led her into the lobby between his rooms and his
son's, and stopping, groped for a secret spring; it opened a press,
perfectly hidden in the wall, with the edges guarded by the moldings.
A large portfolio of papers was in the closet, with gold coin on the
shelves.

The case of papers was so heavy that the lady could not lift it, and
the king carried it to her rooms, saying that the queen would tell her
how to dispose of it. She thrust it between the bed and the mattress,
and went to the queen, who said:

"Campan, those are documents fatal to the king if he were placed on
trial, which the Lord forbid. Particularly--which is why, no doubt, he
confides it all to you--there is a report of a council, in which the
king gave his opinion against war; he made all the ministers sign it,
and reckons on this document being as beneficial in event of a trial as
the others may be hurtful."

The July festival arrived. The idea was to celebrate the triumph of
Petion over the king--that of murdering the latter not being probably
entertained.

Suspended in his functions by the Assembly, Petion was restored to them
on the eve of the rejoicings.

At eleven in the morning, the king came down the grand staircase with
the queen and the royal children. Three or four thousand troops, of
unknown tendencies, escorted them. In vain did the queen seek on their
faces some marks of sympathy; the kindest averted their faces.

There was no mistaking the feeling of the crowd, for cheers for Petion
rose on all sides. As if, too, to give the ovation a more durable stamp
than momentary enthusiasm, the king and the queen could read on all
hats a lettered ribbon: "Petion forever!"

The queen was pale and trembling. Convinced that a plot was aimed at
her husband's life, she started at every instant, fancying she saw a
hand thrust out to bring down a dagger or level a pistol.

On the parade-ground, the monarch alighted, took a place on the left of
the Speaker of the House, and with him walked up to the Altar of the
Country. The queen had to separate from her lord here to go into the
grand stand with her children; she stopped, refusing to go any further
until she saw how he got on, and kept her eyes on him.

At the foot of the altar, one of those rushes came which is common to
great gatherings. The king disappeared as though submerged.

The queen shrieked, and made as if to rush to him; but he rose into
view anew, climbing the steps of the altar.

Among the ordinary symbols figuring in these feasts, such as justice,
power, liberty, etc., one glittered mysteriously and dreadfully under
black crape, carried by a man clad in black and crowned with cypress.
This weird emblem particularly caught the queen's eyes. She was riveted
to the spot, and, while encouraged a little by the king's fate, she
could not take her gaze from this somber apparition. Making an effort
to speak, she gasped, without addressing any one specially:

"Who is that man dressed in mourning?"

"The death's-man," replied a voice which made her shudder.

"And what has he under the veil?" continued she.

"The ax which chopped off the head of King Charles I."

The queen turned round, losing color, for she thought she recognized
the voice. She was not mistaken; the speaker was the magician who had
shown her the awful future in a glass at Taverney, and warned her at
Sèvres and on her return from Varennes--Cagliostro, in fact.

She screamed, and fell fainting into Princess Elizabeth's arms.

One week subsequently, on the twenty-second, at six in the morning, all
Paris was aroused by the first of a series of minute guns. The terrible
booming went on all through the day.

At day-break the six legions of the National Guards were collected at
the City Hall. Two processions were formed throughout the town and
suburbs to spread the proclamation that the country was in danger.

Danton had the idea of this dreadful show, and he had intrusted the
details to Sergent, the engraver, an immense stage-manager.

Each party left the Hall at six o'clock.

First marched a cavalry squadron, with the mounted band playing
a funeral march, specially composed. Next, six field-pieces,
abreast where the road-way was wide enough, or in pairs.
Then four heralds on horseback, bearing ensigns labeled
"Liberty"--"Equality"--"Constitution"--"Our Country." Then came twelve
city officials, with swords by the sides and their scarfs on. Then,
all alone, isolated like France herself, a National Guardsman, in the
saddle of a black horse, holding a large tri-color flag, on which was
lettered:

     "CITIZENS, THE COUNTRY IS IN DANGER!"

In the same order as the preceding, rolled six guns with weighty
jolting and heavy rumbling, National Guards and cavalry at the rear.

On every bridge, crossing, and square, the party halted, and silence
was commanded by the ruffling of the drums. The banners were waved, and
when no sound was heard and the crowd held their peace, the grave voice
of the municipal crier arose, reading the proclamation, and adding:

"The country is in danger!"

This last line was dreadful, and rang in all hearts. It was the shriek
of the nation, of the motherland, of France. It was the parent calling
on her offspring to help her.

And ever and anon the guns kept thundering.

On all the large open places platforms were run up for the voluntary
enlistments. With the intoxication of patriotism, the men rushed to put
their names down. Some were too old, but lied to be inscribed; some too
young, but stood on tiptoe and swore they were full sixteen.

Those who were accepted leaped to the ground, waving their enrollment
papers, and cheering or singing the "Let it go on," and kissing the
cannon's mouth.

It was the betrothal of the French to war--this war of twenty odd
years, which will result in the freedom of Europe, although it may not
altogether be in our time.

The excitement was so great that the Assembly was appalled by its own
work; it sent men through the town to cry out: "Brothers, for the sake
of the country, no rioting! The court wishes disorder as an excuse for
taking the king out of the city, so give it no pretext. The king should
stay among us."

These dread sowers of words added in a deep voice:

"He must be punished."

They mentioned nobody by name, but all knew who was meant.

Every cannon-report had an echo in the heart of the palace. Those
were the king's rooms where the queen and the rest of the family were
gathered. They kept together all day, from feeling that their fate was
decided this time, so grand and solemn. They did not separate until
midnight, when the last cannon was fired.

On the following night Mme. Campan was aroused; she had slept in the
queen's bedroom since a fellow had been caught there with a knife, who
might have been a murderer.

"Is your majesty ill?" she asked, hearing a moan.

"I am always in pain, Campan, but I trust to have it over soon now.
Yes," and she held out her pale hand in the moonbeam, making it seem
all the whiter, "in a month this same moonlight will see us free and
disengaged from our chains."

"Oh, you have accepted Lafayette's offers," said the lady, "and you
will flee?"

"Lafayette's help? Thank God, no," said the queen, with repugnance
there was no mistaking; "no, but in a month, my nephew, Francis, will
be in Paris."

"Is your majesty quite sure?" asked the royal governess, alarmed.

"Yes, all is settled," returned the sovereign; "alliance is made
between Austria and Prussia, two powers who will march upon Paris in
combination. We have the route of the French princes and their allied
armies, and we can surely say that on such and such a day they will be
here or there."

"But do you not fear--"

"Murder?" The queen finished the phrase. "I know that might befall; but
they may hold us as hostages for their necks when vengeance impends.
However, nothing venture, nothing win."

"And when do the allied sovereigns expect to be in Paris?" inquired
Mme. Campan.

"Between the fifteenth and twentieth of August," was the reply.

"God grant it!" said the lady.

But the prayer was not granted; or, if heard, Heaven sent France the
succor she had not dreamed of--the Marseillaise Hymn of Liberty.




CHAPTER VII.

THE MEN FROM MARSEILLES.


We have said that Barbaroux had written to a friend in the south to
send him five hundred men willing to die.

Who was the man who could write such lines? and what influence had he
over his friends?

Charles Barbaroux was a very handsome young man of barely twenty-five,
who was reproached for his beauty, and considered by Mme. Roland as
frivolous and too generally amorous. On the contrary, he loved his
country alone, or must have loved her best, for he died for her.

Son of a hardy sea-faring man, he was a poet and orator when quite
young--at the breaking out of trouble in his native town during the
election of Mirabeau. He was then appointed secretary to the Marseilles
town board. Riots at Arles drew him into them; but the seething caldron
of Paris claimed him; the immense furnace which needed perfume, the
huge crucible hissing for purest metal.

He was Roland's correspondent at the south, and Mme. Roland had
pictured from his regular, precise, and wise letters, a man of forty,
with his head bald from much thinking, and his forehead wrinkled
with vigils. The reality of her dream was a young man, gay, merry,
light, fond of her sex, the type of the rich and brilliant generation
flourishing in '92, to be cut down in '93.

It was in this head, esteemed too frivolous by Mme. Roland, that the
first thought of the tenth of August was conceived, perhaps.

The storm was in the air, but the clouds were tossing about in all
directions for Barbaroux to give them a direction and pile them up over
the Tuileries.

When nobody had a settled plan, he wrote for five hundred determined
men.

The true ruler of France was the man who could write for such men and
be sure of their coming.

Rebecqui chose them himself out of the revolutionists who had fought
in the last two years' popular affrays, in Avignon and the other fiery
towns; they were used to blood; they did not know what fatigue was by
name.

On the appointed day they set out on the two hundred league tramp, as
if it were a day's strolling. Why not? They were hardy seamen, rugged
peasants, sunburned by the African simoom or the mountain gale, with
hands callous from the spade or tough with tar.

Wherever they passed along they were hailed as brigands.

In a halt they received the words and music of Rouget de l'Isle's "Hymn
to Liberty," sent as a viaticum by Barbaroux to shorten the road. The
lips of the Marseilles men made it change in character, while the words
were altered by their new emphasis. The song of brotherhood became one
of death and extermination--forever "the Marseillaise."

Barbaroux had planned to head with the Marseilles men some forty
thousand volunteers Santerre was to have ready to meet them, overwhelm
the City Hall and the House, and then storm the palace. But Santerre
went to greet them with only two hundred men, not liking to let the
strangers have the glory of such a rush.

With ardent eyes, swart visages, and shrill voices, the little band
strode through all Paris to the Champs Elysées, singing the thrilling
song. They camped there, awaiting the banquet on the morrow.

It took place, but some grenadiers were arrayed close to the spot, a
Royalist guard set as a rampart between them and the palace.

They divined they were enemies, and commencing by insults, they went
on to exchanging fisticuffs. At the first blood the Marseillaise
shouted "To arms!" raided the stacks of muskets, and sent the
grenadiers flying with their own bayonets. Luckily, they had the
Tuileries at their backs and got over the draw-bridge, finding shelter
in the royal apartments. There is a legend that the queen bound up the
wounds of one soldier.

The Federals numbered five thousand--Marseilles men, Bretons, and
Dauphinois. They were a power, not from their number, but their faith.
The spirit of the revolution was in them.

They had fire-arms but no ammunition; they called for cartridges, but
none were supplied. Two of them went to the mayor and demanded powder,
or they would kill themselves in the office.

Two municipal officers were on duty--Sergent, Danton's man, and Panis,
Robespierre's.

Sergent had artistic imagination and a French heart; he felt that the
young men spoke with the voice of the country.

"Look out, Panis," he said; "if these youths kill themselves, the blood
will fall on our heads."

"But if we deliver the powder without authorization, we risk our necks."

"Never mind. I believe the time has come to risk our necks. In that
case, everybody for himself," replied Sergent. "Here goes for mine; you
can do as you like."

He signed the delivery note, and Panis put his name to it.

Things were easier now; when the Marseilles men had powder and shot
they would not let themselves be butchered without hitting back.

As soon as they were armed, the Assembly received their petition, and
allowed them to attend the session. The Assembly was in great fear, so
much so as to debate whether it ought not to transfer the meetings to
the country. For everybody stood in doubt, feeling the ground to quake
underfoot and fearing to be swallowed.

This wavering chafed the southerners. No little disheartened, Barbaroux
talked of founding a republic in the south.

He turned to Robespierre, to see if he would help to set the ball
rolling. But the Incorruptible's conditions gave him suspicions, and he
left him, saying:

"We will no more have a dictator than a king."




CHAPTER VIII.

THE FRIEND IN NEED.


The very thing encouraging the Tuileries party was what awed the rebels.

The palace had become a formidable fortress, with a dreadful garrison.

During the night of the fourth of August, the Swiss battalions had been
drawn from out of town into the palace. A few companies were left at
Gaillon, where the king might take refuge.

Three reliable leaders were beside the queen: Maillardet with his
Switzers, Hervilly with the St. Louis Knights and the Constitutional
Guard, and Mandat, who, as National Guard commander, promised twenty
thousand devoted and resolute fighting men.

On the evening of the eighth a man penetrated the fort; everybody knew
him, so that he had no difficulty in passing to the queen's rooms,
where they announced "Doctor Gilbert."

"Ah, welcome, welcome, doctor!" said the royal lady, in a feverish
voice, "I am happy to see you."

He looked sharply at her, for on the whole of her face was such
gladness and satisfaction that it made him shudder. He would sooner
have seen her pale and disheartened.

"I fear I have arrived too late," he said.

"It is just the other way, doctor," she replied, with a smile, an
expression her lips had almost forgotten how to make; "you come at the
right time, and you are welcome. You are going to see what I have long
yearned to show you--a king really royal."

"I am afraid, madame, that you are deceiving yourself," he returned,
"and that you will exhibit rather the commandant of a fort."

"Perhaps, Doctor Gilbert, we can never come to a closer understanding
on the symbolical character of royalty than on other matters. For me a
king is not solely a man who may say, 'I do not wish,' but one who can
say, 'Thus I will.'"

She alluded to the famous veto which led to this crisis.

"Yes, madame," said Gilbert, "and for your majesty, a king is a ruler
who takes revenge."

"Who defends himself," she retorted; "for you know we are openly
threatened, and are to be attacked by an armed force. We are assured
that five hundred desperadoes from Marseilles, headed by one Barbaroux,
took an oath on the ruins of the Bastile, not to go home until they had
camped on the ruins of the Tuileries."

"Indeed, I have heard something of the kind," remarked Gilbert.

"Which only makes you laugh?"

"It alarms me for the king and yourself, madame."

"So that you come to propose that we should resign, and place ourselves
at the mercy of Messieurs Barbaroux and his Marseilles bullies?"

"I only wish the king could abdicate and guarantee, by the sacrifice of
his crown, his life and yours, and the safety of your children."

"Is this the advice you give us, doctor?"

"It is; and I humbly beseech you to follow it."

"Monsieur Gilbert, let me say that you are not consistent in your
opinions."

"My opinions are always the same, madame. Devoted to king and country,
I wished him to be in accord with the Constitution; from this desire
springs the different pieces of counsel which I have submitted."

"What is the one you fit to this juncture?"

"One that you have never had such a good chance to follow. I say, get
away."

"Flee?"

"Ah, you well know that it is possible, and never could be carried
out with greater facility. You have nearly three thousand men in the
palace."

"Nearer five thousand," said the queen, with a smile of satisfaction,
"with double to rise at the first signal we give."

"You have no need to give a signal, which may be intercepted; the five
thousand will suffice."

"What do you think we ought to do with them?"

"Set yourself in their midst, with the king and your august children;
dash out when least expected; at a couple of leagues out, take to horse
and ride into Normandy, to Gaillon, where you are looked for."

"You mean, place ourselves under the thumb of General Lafayette?"

"At least, he has proved that he is devoted to you."

"No, sir, no! With my five thousand in hand, and as many more ready to
come at the call, I like another course better--to crush this revolt
once for all."

"Oh, madame, how right he was who said you were doomed."

"Who was that, sir?"

"A man whose name I dare not repeat to you; but he has spoken three
times to you."

"Silence!" said the queen, turning pale; "we will try to give the lie
to this prophet of evil."

"Madame, I am very much afraid that you are blinded."

"You think that they will venture to attack us?"

"The public spirit turns to this quarter."

"And they reckon on walking in here as easily as they did in June?"

"This is not a stronghold."

"Nay; but if you will come with me, I will show you that we can hold
out some time."

With joy and pride she showed him all the defensive measures of the
military engineers and the number of the garrison whom she believed
faithful.

"That is a comfort, madame," he said, "but it is not security."

"You frown on everything, let me tell you, doctor."

"Your majesty has taken me round where you like; will you let me take
you to your own rooms, now?"

"Willingly, doctor, for I am tired. Give me your arm."

Gilbert bowed to have this high favor, most rarely granted by the
sovereign, even to her intimate friends, especially since her
misfortune.

When they were in her sitting-room he dropped on one knee to her as she
took a seat in an arm-chair.

"Madame," said he, "let me adjure you, in the name of your august
husband, your dear ones, your own safety, to make use of the forces
about you, to flee and not to fight."

"Sir," was the reply, "since the fourteenth of July, I have been
aspiring for the king to have his revenge; I believe the time has
come. We will save royalty, or bury ourselves under the ruins of the
Tuileries."

"Can nothing turn you from this fatal resolve?"

"Nothing."

She held out her hand to him, half to help him to rise, half to send
him away. He kissed her hand respectfully, and rising, said:

"Will your majesty permit me to write a few lines which I regard as so
urgent that I do not wish to delay one instant?"

"Do so, sir," she said, pointing to a writing-table, where he sat down
and wrote these lines:

     "MY LORD,--Come! the queen is in danger of death, if a
     friend does not persuade her to flee, and I believe you are the
     only one who can have that influence over her."

"May I ask whom you are writing to, without being too curious?"
demanded the lady.

"To the Count of Charny, madame," was Gilbert's reply.

"And why do you apply to him?"

"For him to obtain from your majesty what I fail to do."

"Count Charny is too happy to think of his unfortunate friends; he will
not come," said the queen.

The door opened, and an usher appeared.

"The Right Honorable, the Count of Charny," he announced, "desiring to
learn if he may present his respects to your majesty."

The queen had been pale, and now became corpse-like, as she stammered
some unintelligible words.

"Let him enter," said Gilbert; "Heaven hath sent him."

Charny appeared at the door in naval officer's uniform.

"Oh, come in, sir; I was writing for you," said the physician, handing
him the note.

"Hearing of the danger her majesty was incurring, I came," said the
nobleman, bowing.

"Madame, for Heaven's sake, hear and heed what Count Charny says," said
Gilbert; "his voice will be that of France."

Respectfully saluting the lord and the royal lady, Gilbert went out,
still cherishing a last hope.




CHAPTER IX.

CHARNY ON GUARD.


On the night of the ninth of August, the royal family supped as usual;
nothing could disturb the king in his meals. But while Princess
Elizabeth and Lady Lamballe wept and prayed, the queen prayed without
weeping. The king withdrew to go to confession.

At this time the doors opened, and Count Charny walked in, pale, but
perfectly calm.

"May I have speech with the king?" he asked, as he bowed.

"At present I am the king," answered Marie Antoinette.

Charny knew this as well as anybody, but he persisted.

"You may go up to the king's rooms, count, but I protest that you will
very much disturb him."

"I understand; he is with Mayor Petion."

"The king is with his ghostly counselor," replied the lady, with an
indescribable expression.

"Then I must make my report to your majesty as major-general of the
castle," said the count.

"Yes, if you will kindly do so."

"I have the honor to set forth the effective strength of our forces.
The heavy horse-guards, under Rulhieres and Verdiere, to the number
of six hundred, are in battle array on the Louvre grand square; the
Paris City foot-guards are barracked in the stables; a hundred and
fifty are drawn from them to guard at Toulouse House, at need, the
Treasury and the discount and extra cash offices; the Paris Mounted
Patrol, only thirty men, are posted in the princes' yard, at the foot
of the king's back stairs; two hundred officers and men of the old Life
Guards, a hundred young Royalists, as many noblemen, making some four
hundred combatants, are in the Bull's-eye Hall and adjoining rooms;
two or three hundred National Guards are scattered in the gardens
and court-yards; and lastly, fifteen hundred Swiss, the backbone of
resistance, are taking position under the grand vestibule and the
staircases which they are charged to defend."

"Do not all these measures set you at ease, my lord?" inquired the
queen.

"Nothing can set me at ease when your majesty's safety is at stake,"
returned the count.

"Then your advice is still for flight?"

"My advice, madame, is that you ought, with the king and the royal
children, be in the midst of us."

The queen shook her head.

"Your majesty dislikes Lafayette? Be it so. But you have confidence
in the Duke of Liancourt, who is in Rouen, in the house of an English
gentleman of the name of Canning. The commander of the troops in that
province has made them swear allegiance to the king; the Salis-Chamade
Swiss regiment is echeloned across the road, and it may be relied on.
All is still quiet. Let us get out over the swing-bridge, and reach
the Etoille bars, where three hundred of the horse-guards await us. At
Versailles, we can readily get together fifteen hundred noblemen. With
four thousand, I answer for taking you wherever you like to go."

"I thank you, Lord Charny. I appreciate the devotion which made you
leave those dear to you, to offer your services to a foreigner."

"The queen is unjust toward me," replied Charny. "My sovereign's
existence is always the most precious of all in my eyes, as duty is
always the dearest of virtues."

"Duty--yes, my lord," murmured the queen; "but I believe I understand
my own when everybody is bent on doing theirs. It is to maintain
royalty grand and noble, and to have it fall worthily, like the
ancient gladiators, who studied how to die with grace."

"Is this your majesty's last word?"

"It is--above all, my last desire."

Charny bowed, and as he met Mme. Campan by the door, he said to her:

"Suggest to the princesses that they should put all their valuables
in their pockets, as they may have to quit the palace without further
warning."

While the governess went to speak to the ladies, he returned to the
queen, and said:

"Madame, it is impossible that you should not have some hope beyond the
reliance on material forces. Confide in me, for you will please bear in
mind that at such a strait, I will have to give an account to the Maker
and to man for what will have happened."

"Well, my lord," said the queen, "an agent is to pay Petion two hundred
thousand francs, and Danton fifty thousand, for which sums the latter
is to stay at home and the other is to come to the palace."

"Are you sure of the go-betweens?"

"You said that Petion had come, which is something toward it."

"Hardly enough; as I understood that he had to be sent for three times."

"The token is, in speaking to the king, he is to touch his right
eyebrow with his forefinger--"

"But if not arranged?"

"He will be our prisoner, and I have given the most positive orders
that he is not to be let quit the palace."

The ringing of a bell was heard.

"What is that?" inquired the queen.

"The general alarm," rejoined Charny.

The princesses rose in alarm.

"What is the matter?" exclaimed the queen. "The tocsin is always the
trumpet of rebellion."

"Madame," said Charny, more affected by the sinister sound than the
queen, "I had better go and learn whether the alarm means anything
grave."

"But we shall see you again?" asked she, quickly.

"I came to take your majesty's orders, and I shall not leave you until
you are out of danger."

Bowing, he went out. The queen stood pensive for a space, murmuring: "I
suppose we had better see if the king has got through confessing."

While she was going out, Princess Elizabeth took some garments off a
sofa in order to lie down with more comfort; from her fichu she removed
a cornelian brooch, which she showed to Mme. Campan; the engraved
stone had a bunch of lilies and the motto: "Forget offenses, forgive
injuries."

"I fear that this will have little influence over our enemies," she
remarked; "but it ought not be the less dear to us."

As she was finishing the words, a gunshot was heard in the yard.

The ladies screamed.

"There goes the first shot," said Lady Elizabeth. "Alas! it will not be
the last."

Mayor Petion had come into the palace under the following
circumstances. He arrived about half past ten. He was not made to
wait, as had happened before, but was told that the king was ready to
see him; but to arrive, he had to walk through a double row of Swiss
guards, National Guards, and those volunteer royalists called Knights
of the Dagger. Still, as they knew he had been sent for, they merely
cast the epithets of "traitor" and "Judas" in his face as he went up
the stairs.

Petion smiled as he went in at the door of the room, for here the king
had given him the lie on the twentieth of June; he was going to have
ample revenge.

The king was impatiently awaiting.

"Ah! so you have come, Mayor Petion?" he said. "What is the good word
from Paris?"

Petion furnished the account of the state of matters--or, at least, an
account.

"Have you nothing more to tell me?" demanded the ruler.

"No," replied Petion, wondering why the other stared at him. Louis
watched for the signal that the mayor had accepted the bribe.

It was clear that the king had been cheated; some swindler had pocketed
the money. The queen came in as the question was put to Petion.

"How does our friend stand?" she whispered.

"He has not made any sign," rejoined the king.

"Then he is our prisoner," said she.

"Can I retire?" inquired the mayor.

"For God's sake, do not let him go!" interposed the queen.

"Not yet, sir; I have something yet to say to you," responded the king,
raising his voice. "Pray step into this closet."

This implied to those in the inner room that Petion was intrusted to
them, and was not to be allowed to go.

Those in the room understood perfectly, and surrounded Petion, who felt
that he was a prisoner. He was the thirtieth in a room where there was
not elbow-room for four.

"Why, gentlemen, we are smothering here," he said; "I propose a change
of air."

It was a sentiment all agreed with, and they followed him out of the
first door he opened, and down into the walled-in garden, where he was
as much confined as in the closet. To kill time, he picked up a pebble
or two and tossed them over the walls.

While he was playing thus, and chatting with Roederer, attorney of the
province, the message came twice that the king wanted to see him.

"No," replied Petion; "it is too hot quarters up there. I remember the
closet, and I have no eagerness to be in it again. Besides, I have an
appointment with somebody on the Feuillants' Quay."

He went on playing at clearing the wall with stones.

"With whom have you an appointment?" asked Roederer.

At this instant the Assembly door on the Feuillants' Quay opened.

"I fancy this is just what I was waiting for," remarked the mayor.

"Order to let Mayor Petion pass forth," said a voice; "the Assembly
demands his presence at the bar of the House, to give an account of the
state of the city."

"Just the thing," muttered Petion. "Here I am," he replied, in a loud
voice; "I am ready to respond to the quips of my enemies."

The National Guards, imagining that Petion was to be berated, let him
out.

It was nearly three in the morning; the day was breaking. A singular
thing, the aurora was the hue of blood.




CHAPTER X.

BILLET AND PITOU.


On being called by the king, Petion had foreseen that he might more
easily get into the palace than out, so he went up to a hard-faced man
marred by a scar on the brow.

"Farmer Billet," said he, "what was your report about the House?"

"That it would hold an all-night sitting."

"Very good; and what did you say you saw on the New Bridge?"

"Cannon and Guards, placed by order of Colonel Mandat."

"And you also stated that a considerable force was collected under St.
John's Arcade, near the opening of St. Antoine Street?"

"Yes; again, by order of Colonel Mandat."

"Well, will you listen to me? Here you have an order to Manuel and
Danton to send back to barracks the troops at St. John's Arcade, and
to remove the guns from the bridge; at any cost, you will understand,
these orders must be obeyed."

"I will hand it to Danton myself."

"Good. You are living in St. Honore Street?"

"Yes, mayor."

"When you have given Danton the order, get home and snatch a bit of
rest. About two o'clock, go out to the Feuillants' Quay, where you
will stand by the wall. If you see or hear stones falling over from
the other side of the wall, it will mean that I am a prisoner in the
Tuileries, and detained by violence."

"I understand."

"Present yourself at the bar of the House, and ask my colleagues to
claim me. You understand, Farmer Billet, I am placing my life in your
hands."

"I will answer for it," replied the bluff farmer; "take it easy."

Petion had therefore gone into the lion's den, relying on Billet's
patriotism.

The latter had spoken the more firmly, as Pitou had come to town. He
dispatched the young peasant to Danton, with the word for him not to
return without him. Lazy as the orator was, Pitou had a prevailing way,
and he brought Danton with him.

Danton had seen the cannon on the bridge, and the National Guards at
the end of the popular quarter, and he understood the urgency of not
leaving such forces on the rear of the people's army. With Petion's
order in hand, he and Manuel sent the Guards away and removed the guns.

This cleared the road for the Revolution.

In the meantime, Billet and Pitou had gone to their old lodging in St.
Honore Street, to which Pitou bobbed his head as to an old friend. The
farmer sat down, and signified the young man was to do the same.

"Thank you, but I am not tired," returned Pitou; but the other
insisted, and he gave way.

"Pitou, I sent for you to join me," said the farmer.

"And you see I have not kept you waiting," retorted the National Guards
captain, with his own frank smile, showing all his thirty-two teeth.

"No. You must have guessed that something serious is afoot."

"I suspected as much. But, I say, friend Billet, I do not see anything
of Mayor Bailly or General Lafayette."

"Bailly is a traitor, who nearly murdered the lot of us on the
parade-ground."

"Yes, I know that, as I picked you up there, almost swimming in your
own blood."

"And Lafayette is another traitor, who wanted to take away the king."

"I did not know that. Lafayette a traitor, eh? I never would have
thought of that. And the king?"

"He is the biggest traitor of the lot, Pitou."

"I can not say I am surprised at that," said Pitou.

"He conspires with the foreigner, and wants to deliver France to the
enemy. The Tuileries is the center of the conspiracy, and we have
decided to take possession of the Tuileries. Do you understand this,
Pitou?"

"Of course I understand. But, look here, Master Billet; we took the
Bastile, and this will not be so hard a job."

"That's where you are out."

"What, more difficult, when the walls are not so high?"

"That's so; but they are better guarded. The Bastile had but a hundred
old soldiers to guard it, while the palace has three or four thousand
men; this is saying nothing of the Bastile having been carried by
surprise, while the Tuileries folk must know we mean to attack, and
will be on the lookout."

"They will defend it, will they?" queried Pitou.

"Yes," replied Billet--"all the more as the defense is trusted to Count
Charny, they say."

"Indeed. He did leave Boursonnes with his lady by the post," observed
Pitou. "Lor', is he a traitor, too?"

"No; he is an aristocrat, that is all. He has always been for the
court, so that he is no traitor to the people; he never asked us to put
any faith in him."

"So it looks as though we will have a tussle with Lord Charny?"

"It is likely, friend Ange."

"What a queer thing it is, neighbors clapper-clawing!"

"Yes--what is called civil war, Pitou; but you are not obliged to fight
unless you like."

"Excuse me, farmer, but it suits me from the time when it is to your
taste."

"But I should even like it better if you did not fight."

"Why did you send for me, Master Billet?"

"I sent for you to give you this paper," replied Billet, with his face
clouding.

"What is this all about?"

"It is the draft of my will."

"Your will?" cried Pitou, laughing. "Hang me, if you look like a man
about to die!"

"No; but I may be a man who will get killed," returned the
revolutionist, pointing to his gun and cartridge-box hanging on the
wall.

"That's a fact," said Ange Pitou; "we are all mortal."

"So that I have come to place my will in your hands as the sole
legatee."

"No, I thank you. But you are only saying this for a joke?"

"I am telling you a fact."

"But it can not be. When a man has rightful heirs he can not give away
his property to outsiders."

"You are wrong, Pitou; he can."

"Then he ought not."

"I have no heirs," replied Billet, with a dark cloud passing over his
face.

"No heirs? How about heiresses, then? What do you call Miss Catherine?"

"I do not know anybody of that name, Pitou."

"Come, come, farmer, do not say such things; you make me sad."

"Pitou, from the time when something is mine, it is mine to give away;
in the same way, should I die, what I leave to you will be yours, to
deal with as you please, to be given away as freely."

"Ha! Good--yes," exclaimed the young man, who began to understand;
"then, if anything bad happens to you--But how stupid I am; nothing bad
could happen to you."

"You yourself said just now that we are all mortal."

"So I did; but--well, I do not know but that you are right. I take the
will, Master Billet; but is it true that if I fall heir, I can do as I
please with the property?"

"No doubt, since it will be yours. And, you understand, you are a sound
patriot, Pitou; they will not stand you off from it, as they might folk
who have connived with the aristocrats."

"It's a bargain," said Pitou, who was getting it into his brain; "I
accept."

"Then that is all I have to say to you. Put the paper in your pocket
and go to sleep."

"What for?"

"Because we shall have some work to do to-morrow--no, this day, for it
is two in the morning."

"Are you going out, Master Billet?"

"Only as far as the river."

"You are sure you do not want me?"

"On the other hand, you would be in my way."

"I suppose I might have a bite and a sup, then?"

"Of course. I forgot to ask if you might not be hungry."

"Because you know I am always hungry," said Pitou, laughing.

"I need not tell you where the larder is."

"No, no, master; do not worry about me. But you are going to come back
here?"

"I shall return."

"Or else tell me where we are to meet?"

"It is useless, for I shall be home in an hour."

Pitou went in search of the eatables with an appetite which in him, as
in the case of the king, no events could alter, however serious they
might be, while Billet proceeded to the water-side to do what we know.

He had hardly arrived on the spot before a pebble fell, followed by
another, and some more, teaching him that what Petion apprehended
had come to pass, and that he was a prisoner to the Royalists. So he
had flown, according to his instructions, to the Assembly, which had
claimed the mayor, as we have described.

Petion, liberated, had only to walk through the House to get back to
the mayor's office, leaving his carriage in the Tuileries yard to
represent him.

For his part, Billet went home, and found Ange finishing his supper.

"Any news?" asked he.

"Nothing, except that day is breaking and the sky is the color of
blood."




CHAPTER XI.

IN THE MORNING.


The early sunbeams shone on two horsemen riding at a walking pace along
the deserted water-side by the Tuileries. They were Colonel Mandat and
his aid.

At one A. M. he was summoned to the City Hall, and refused to
go; but on the order being renewed more peremptorily at two, Attorney
Roederer said to him:

"Mark, colonel, that under the law the commander of the National Guard
is to obey the City Government."

He decided to go, ignorant of two things.

In the first place, forty-seven sections of the forty-eight had joined
to the town rulers each three commissioners, with orders to work with
the officials and "save the country." Mandat expected to see the old
board as before, and not at all to behold a hundred and forty-one fresh
faces. Again, he had no idea of the order from this same board to
clear the New Bridge of cannon and vacate St. John's Arcade, an order
so important that Danton and Manuel personally had superintended its
execution.

Consequently, on reaching the Pont Neuf, Mandat was stupefied to find
it utterly deserted. He stopped and sent his aid to scout. In ten
minutes this officer returned with the word that he saw no guns or
National Guards, while the neighborhood was as lonesome as the bridge.

Mandat continued his way, though he perhaps ought to have gone back
to the palace; but men, like things, must wend whither their destiny
impels.

Proportionably to his approach to the City Hall, he seemed to enter
into liveliness. In the same way as the blood in some organizations
leaves the extremities cold and pale on rushing back to fortify the
heart, so all the movement and heat--the Revolution, in short--was
around the City Hall, the seat of popular life, the heart of that great
body, Paris.

He stopped to send his officer to the Arcade; but the National Guard
had been withdrawn from there, too. He wanted to retrace his steps; but
the crowd had packed in behind him, and he was carried, like a waif on
the wave, up the Hall steps.

"Stay here," he said to his follower, "and if evil befalls me, run and
tell them at the palace."

Mandat yielded to the mob, and was floated into the grand hall, where
he met strange and stern faces. It was the insurrection complete,
demanding an account of the conduct of this man, who had not only tried
to crush it in its development, but to strangle it in its birth.

One of the members of the Commune, the dread body which was to stifle
the Assembly and struggle with the Convention, advanced and in the
general's name asked:

"By whose order did you double the palace guard?"

"The Mayor of Paris'."

"Show that order."

"I left it at the Tuileries, so that it might be carried out during my
absence."

"Why did you order out the cannon?"

"Because I set the battalion on the march, and the field-pieces move
with the regiment."

"Where is Petion?"

"He was at the palace when I last saw him."

"A prisoner?"

"No; he was strolling about the gardens."

The interrogation was interrupted here by a new member bringing an
unsealed letter, of which he asked leave to make communication. Mandat
had no need to do more than cast a glance on this note to acknowledge
that he was lost; he recognized his own writing. It was his order
to the commanding officer at St. John's Arcade, sent at one in the
morning, for him to attack in the rear the mob making for the palace,
while the battalion on New Bridge attacked it in flank. This order had
fallen into the Commune's hands after the dismissal of the soldiers.

The examination was over; for what could be more damning than this
letter in any admissions of the accused?

The council decided that Mandat should be imprisoned in the abbey.
The tale goes that the chairman of the board, in saying, "Remove the
prisoner," made a sweep of the hand, edge downward, like chopping with
an ax. As the guillotine was not in use then, it must have been an
arranged sign--perhaps by the Invisibles, whose Grand Copt had divined
that instrument.

At all events, the result showed that the sign was taken to imply death.

Hardly had Mandat gone down three of the City Hall steps before a
pistol-shot shattered his skull, at the very instant when his son ran
toward him. Three years before, the same reception had met Flesselles.

Mandat was only wounded, but as he rose, he fell again with a score of
pike-wounds. The boy held out his hands and wailed for his father, but
none paid any heed to him. Presently, in the bloody ring, where bare
arms plunged amid flashing pikes and swords, a head was seen to surge
up, detached from the trunk.

The boy swooned.

The aid-de-camp galloped back to the Tuileries to report what he had
witnessed.

The murderers went off in two gangs: one took the body to the river, to
throw it in, the other carried the head through the streets.

This was going on at four in the morning.

Let us precede the aid to the Tuileries, and see what was happening.

Having confessed, and made easy about matters since his conscience was
tranquilized, the king, unable to resist the cravings of nature, went
to bed. But we must say that he lay down dressed.

On the alarm-bells ringing more loudly, and the roll of the drums
beating the reveille, he was roused.

Colonel Chesnaye, to whom Mandat had left his powers, awoke the monarch
to have him address the National Guards, and by his presence and some
timely words revive their enthusiasm.

The king rose, but half awake, dull and staggering. He was wearing a
powdered wig, and he had flattened all the side he had lain upon. The
hair-dresser could not be found, so he had to go out with the wig out
of trim.

Notified that the king was going to show himself to the defenders, the
queen ran out from the council hall where she was.

In contrast with the poor sovereign, whose dim sight sought no
one's glance, whose mouth-muscles were flabby and palpitating with
involuntary twitches, while his violet coat suggested he was wearing
mourning for majesty, the queen was burning with fever, although pale.
Her eyes were red, though dry.

She kept close to this phantom of monarchy, who came out in the day
instead of midnight, with owlish, blinking eyes. She hoped to inspire
him with her overflow of life, strength, and courage.

All went well enough while this exhibition was in the rooms, though the
National Guards, mixed in with the noblemen, seeing their ruler close
to this poor, flaccid, heavy man, who had so badly failed on a similar
occasion at Varennes, wondered if this really was the monarch whose
poetical legend the women and the priests were already beginning to
weave.

This was not the one they had expected to see.

The aged Duke of Mailly--with one of those good intentions destined to
be another paving-stone for down below--drew his rapier, and sinking
down at the foot of the king, vowed in a quavering voice to die, he
and the old nobility which he represented, for the grandson of Henry
IV. Here were two blunders: the National Guards had no great sympathy
for the old nobility, and they were not here to defend the descendant
of Henry IV., but the constitutional king.

So, in reply to a few shouts of "Hail to the king!" cheers for the
nation burst forth on all sides.

Something to make up for this coolness was sought. The king was urged
to go down into the royal yard. Alas! the poor potentate had no will
of his own. Disturbed at his meals, and cheated, with only one hour's
sleep instead of seven, he was but an automaton, receiving impetus from
outside its material nature.

Who gave this impetus? The queen, a woman of nerve, who had neither
slept nor eaten.

Some unhappy characters fail in all they undertake, when circumstances
are beyond their level. Instead of attracting dissenters, Louis XVI.,
in going up to them, seemed expressly made to show how little glamour
majesty can lend a man who has no genius or strength of mind.

Here, as in the rooms, when the Royalists managed to get up a shout of
"Long live the king!" an immense hurrah for the nation replied to them.

The Royalists being dull enough to persist, the patriots overwhelmed
them with "No, no, no; no other ruler than the nation!"

And the king, almost supplicating, added: "Yes, my sons, the nation and
the monarch make but one henceforward."

"Bring the prince," whispered Marie Antoinette to Princess Elizabeth;
"perhaps the sight of a child may touch them."

While they were looking for the dauphin, the king continued the sad
review. The bad idea struck him to appeal to the artillerists, who
were mainly Republicans. If the king had the gift of speech-making,
he might have forced the men to listen to him, though their belief led
them astray, for it would have been a daring step, and it might have
helped him to face the cannon; but there was nothing exhilarating in
his words or gesture; he stammered.

The Royalists tried to cover his stammerings with the luckless hail of
"Long live the king!" already twice a failure, and it nearly brought
about a collision.

Some cannoniers left their places and rushed over to the king,
threatening him with their fists, and saying:

"Do you think that we will shoot down our brothers to defend a traitor
like you?"

The queen drew the king back.

"Here comes the dauphin!" called out voices. "Long live the hope of the
realm!"

Nobody took up the cry. The poor boy had come in at the wrong time; as
theatrical language says, he had missed his cue.

The king went back into the palace, a downright retreat--almost a
flight. When he got to his private rooms he dropped, puffing and
blowing, into an easy-chair.

Stopping by the door, the queen looked around for some support. She
spied Charny standing up by the door of her own rooms, and she went
over to him.

"Ah, all is lost!" she moaned.

"I am afraid so, my lady," replied the Life Guardsman.

"Can we not still flee?"

"It is too late."

"What is left for us to do, then?"

"We can but die," responded Charny, bowing.

The queen heaved a sigh, and went into her own rooms.




CHAPTER XII.

THE FIRST MASSACRE.


Mandat had hardly been slain, before the Commune nominated Santerre
as commanding general in his stead, and he ordered the drums to beat
in all the town and the bells to be rung harder than ever in all the
steeples. He sent out patrols to scour the ways, and particularly to
scout around the Assembly.

Some twenty prowlers were made prisoners, of whom half escaped before
morning, leaving eleven in the Feuillants' guard-house. In their midst
was a dandified young gentleman in the National Guard uniform, the
newness of which, the superiority of his weapons, and the elegance of
his style, made them suspect he was an aristocrat. He was quite calm.
He said that he went to the palace on an order, which he showed the
examining committee of the Feuillants' ward. It ran:

     "The National Guard, bearer of this paper, will go to the palace
     to learn what the state of affairs is, and return to report to the
     Attorney-and-Syndic-General of the Department.

                             (Signed)                "BOIRIE,
                                                     "LEROULX,
                                          "Municipal Officers."

The order was plain enough, but it was thought that the signatures were
forged, and it was sent to the City Hall by a messenger to have them
verified.

This last arrest had brought a large crowd around the place, and some
such voices as are always to be heard at popular gatherings yelled for
the prisoner's death.

An official saw that this desire must not spread, and was making a
speech, to which the mob was yielding, when the messenger came back
from the Hall to say the order was genuine, and they ought to set at
liberty the prisoner named Suleau.

At this name, a woman in the mob raised her head and uttered a scream
of rage.

"Suleau?" she cried. "Suleau, the editor of the 'Acts of the Apostles'
newspaper, one of the slayers of Liege independence? Let me at this
Suleau! I call for the death of Suleau!"

The crowd parted to let this little, wiry woman go through. She wore
a riding-habit of the national colors, and was carrying a sword in a
cross-belt. She went up to the city official and forced him to give her
the place on the stand. Her head was barely above the concourse, before
they all roared:

"Bravo, Theroigne!"

Indeed, Theroigne was a most popular woman, so that Suleau had made
a hit when he said she was the bride of Citizen Populus, as well as
referring to her free-and-easy morals.

Besides, he had published at Brussels the "Alarm for Kings," and thus
helped the Belgian outbreak, and to replace under the Austrian cane and
the priestly miter a noble people wishing to be free and join France.

At this very epoch Theroigne was writing her memoirs, and had read the
part about her arrest there to the Jacobin Club.

She claimed the death of the ten other prisoners along with Suleau.

Through the door he heard her ringing voice, amid applause. He called
the captain of the guard to him, and asked to be turned loose to the
mob, that by his sacrifice he might save his fellow-prisoners. They did
not believe he meant it. They refused to open the door to him, and he
tried to jump out of the window, but they pulled him back. They did not
think that they would be handed over to the slaughterers in cold blood;
they were mistaken.

Intimidated by the yells, Chairman Bonjour yielded to Theroigne's
demand, and bid the National Guardsman stand aloof from resisting the
popular will. They stepped aside, and the door was left free. The mob
burst into the jail and grabbed the first prisoner to hand.

It was a priest, Bonyon, a playwright noted for his failures and his
epigrams. He was a large-built man, and fought desperately with the
butchers, who tore him from the arms of the commissioner who tried to
save him; though he had no weapon but his naked fists, he laid out two
or three of the ruffians. A bayonet pinned him to the wall, so that he
expired without being able to hit with his last blows.

Two of the prisoners managed to escape in the scuffle.

The next to the priest was an old Royal Guardsman, whose defense was
not less vigorous; his death was but the more cruel. A third was cut to
pieces before Suleau's turn came.

"There is your Suleau," said a woman to Theroigne.

She did not know him by sight; she thought he was a priest, and scoffed
at him as the Abbe Suleau. Like a wild cat, she sprung at his throat.
He was young, brave, and lusty; with a fist blow he sent her ten paces
off, shook off the men who had seized him, and wrenching a saber from a
hand, felled a couple of the assassins.

Then commenced a horrible conflict. Gaining ground toward the door,
Suleau cut himself three times free; but he was obliged to turn round
to get the cursed door open, and in that instant twenty blades ran
through his body. He fell at the feet of Theroigne, who had the cruel
joy of inflicting his last wound.

Another escaped, another stoutly resisted, but the rest were butchered
like sheep. All the bodies were dragged to Vendome Place, where their
heads were struck off and set on poles for a march through the town.

Thus, before the action, blood was spilled in two places; on the City
Hall steps and in Feuillants' yard. We shall presently see it flow in
the Tuileries; the brook after the rain-drops, the river after the
brook.

While this massacre was being perpetrated, about nine A. M.,
some eleven thousand National Guards, gathered by the alarm-bell of
Barbaroux and the drum-beat of Santerre, marched down the St. Antoine
ward and came out on the Strand. They wanted the order to assail the
Tuileries.

Made to wait for an hour, two stories beguiled them: either concessions
were hoped from the court, or the St. Marceau ward was not ready, and
they could not fall on without them.

A thousand pikemen waxed restless; as ever, the worst armed wanted to
begin the fray. They broke through the ranks of the Guard, saying that
they were going to do without them and take the palace.

Some of the Marseilles Federals and a few French Guards--of the same
regiments which had stormed the Bastile three years before--took the
lead and were acclaimed as chiefs. These were the vanguard of the
insurrection.

In the meanwhile, the aid who had seen Mandat murdered had raced back
to the Tuileries; but it was not till after the king and the queen had
returned from the fiasco of a review that he announced the ghastly news.

The sound of a disturbance mounted to the first floor and entered by
the open windows.

The City and the National Guards and the artillerists--the patriots, in
short--had taunted the grenadiers with being the king's tools, saying
that they were bought up by the court; and as they were ignorant of
their commander's murder by the mob, a grenadier shouted:

"It looks as though that shuffler Mandat had sent few aristocrats here."

Mandat's eldest son was in the Guards' ranks--we know where the other
boy was, uselessly trying to defend his father on the City Hall steps.
At this insult to his absent sire, the young man sprung out of the
line with his sword flourished. Three or four gunners rushed to meet
him. Weber, the queen's attendant, was among the St. Roch district
grenadiers, dressed as a National Guardsman. He flew to the young man's
help. The clash of steel was heard as the quarrel spread between the
two parties.

Drawn to the window by the noise, the queen perceived her
foster-brother, and she sent the king's valet to bring him to her.

Weber came up and told what was happening, whereupon she acquainted him
with the death of Mandat.

The uproar went on beneath the windows.

"The cannoniers are leaving their pieces," said Weber, looking out;
"they have no spikes, but they have driven balls home without powder,
so that they are rendered useless!"

"What do you think of all this?"

"I think your majesty had better consult Syndic Roederer, who seems the
most honest man in the palace."

Roederer was brought before the queen in her private apartment as the
clock struck nine.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE REPULSE.


At this point, Captain Durler, of the Switzers, went up to the king to
get orders from him or the major-general. The latter perceived the good
captain as he was looking for some usher to introduce him.

"What do you want, captain?" he inquired.

"You, my Lord Charny, as you are the garrison commander. I want the
final orders, as the head of the insurrectionary column appears on the
Carrousel."

"You are not to let them force their way through, the king having
decided to die in the midst of us."

"Rely on us, major-general," briefly replied Captain Durler, going back
to his men with this order, which was their death-sentence.

As he said, the van of the rebels was in sight. It was the thousand
pikemen, at the head of whom marched some twenty Marseilles men and
fifteen French Guardsmen; in the ranks of the latter gleamed the
bullion epaulets of a National Guards captain. This young officer was
Ange Pitou, who had been recommended by Billet, and was charged with a
mission of which we shall hear more.

Behind these, at a quarter-mile distance, came a considerable body of
National Guards and Federals, preceded by a twelve-gun battery.

When the garrison commandant's order was transmitted to them, the Swiss
fell silently into line and resolutely stood, with cold and gloomy
firmness.

Less severely disciplined, the National Guards took up their post more
disorderly and noisily, but with equal resolution.

The nobles, badly marshaled, and armed with striking weapons only, as
swords or short-range pistols, and aware that the combat would be to
the death, saw the moment approach with feverish glee when they could
grapple with their ancient adversary, the people, the eternal athlete
always thrown, but growing the stronger during eight centuries.

While the besieged were taking places, knocking was heard at the royal
court-yard gate, and many voices shouting: "A flag of truce!" Over the
wall at this spot was seen a white handkerchief tied to the tip of a
pike-staff.

Roederer was on his way to the king when he saw this at the gate and
ordered it to be opened. The janitor did so, and then ran off as fast
as he could. Roederer confronted the foremost of the revolutionists.

"My friends," said he, "you wanted the gates open to a flag of truce,
and not to an army. Who wants to hold the parley?"

"I am your man," said Pitou, with his sweet voice and bland smile.

"Who are you?"

"Captain Ange Pitou, of the Haramont Federal Volunteers."

Roederer did not know who the Haramont Federals were, but he judged it
not worth while to inquire when time was so precious.

"What are you wanting?"

"I want way through for myself and my friends."

Pitou's friends, who were in rags, brandished their pikes, and looked
with their savage eyes like dangerous enemies indeed.

"What do you want to go through here for?"

"To go and surround the Assembly. We have twelve guns, but shall not
use e'er a one if you do as we wish."

"What do you wish?"

"The dethronement of the king."

"This is a grave question, sir," observed Roederer.

"Very grave," replied Pitou, with his customary politeness.

"It calls for some debate."

"That is only fair," returned Ange. "It is going on ten o'clock, less
the quarter," said he; "if we do not have an answer by ten as it
strikes, we shall begin our striking, too."

"Meanwhile, I suppose you will let us shut the door?"

Pitou ordered his crowd back; and the door was closed; but through
the momentarily open door the besiegers had caught a glimpse of the
formidable preparations made to receive them.

As soon as the door was closed, Pitou's followers had a keen desire to
keep on parleying.

Some were hoisted upon their comrades' shoulders, so that they could
bestride the wall, where they began to chat with the National Guardsmen
inside. These shook hands with them, and they were merry together as
the quarter of an hour passed.

Then a man came from the palace with the word that they were to be let
in.

The invaders believed that they had their request granted, and they
flocked in as soon as the doors were opened, like men who had been
kept waiting--all in a heap. They stuck their caps on their pikes and
whooped "Hurrah for the nation!"--"Long live the National Guard!"--"The
Swiss forever!"

The National Guard echoed the shout of the nation, but the Swiss kept a
gloomy and sinister muteness.

The inrush only ceased when the intruders were up to the cannon
muzzles, where they stopped to look around.

The main vestibule was crammed with Swiss, three deep; on each step was
a rank, so that six could fire at once.

Some of the invaders, including Pitou, began to consider, although it
was rather late to reflect.

But though seeing the danger, the mob did not think of running away;
it tried to turn it by jesting with the soldiers. The Guards took the
joking as it was made, but the Swiss looked glum, for something had
happened five minutes before the insurrectionary column marched up.

In the quarrel between the Guards and the grenadiers over the insult
to Mandat, the former had parted from the Royalist guards, and as they
went off they said good-bye to the Swiss, whom they wanted to go away
with them.

They said that they would receive in their own homes as brothers any of
the Swiss who would come with them.

Two from the Waldenses--that is, French Swiss--replied to the appeal
made in their own tongue, and took the French by the hand. At the same
instant two shots were fired up at the palace windows, and bullets
struck the deserters in the very arms of those who decoyed them away.

Excellent marksmen as chamois-hunters, the Swiss officers had nipped
the mutiny thus in the bud. It is plain now why the other Swiss were
mute.

The men who had rushed into the yard were such as always oddly
run before all outbreaks. They were armed with new pikes and old
fire-arms--that is, worse than unarmed.

The cannoniers had come over to their side, as well as the National
Guards, and they wanted to induce the Switzers to do the same.

They did not notice that time was passing and that the quarter of an
hour Pitou had given Roederer had doubled; it was now a quarter past
ten. They were having a good time; why should they worry?

One tatterdemalion had not a sword or a pike, but a pruning-hook, and
he said to his next neighbor:

"Suppose I were to fish for a Swiss?"

"Good idea! Try your luck," said the other.

So he hooked a Swiss by the belt and drew him toward him, the soldier
resisting just enough to make out that he was dragged.

"I have got a bite," said the fisher for men.

"Then, haul him in, but go gently," said his mate.

The man with the hook drew softly indeed, and the guardsman was drawn
out of the entrance into the yard, like a fish from the pond onto the
bank. Up rose loud whoops and roars of laughter.

"Try for another," said the crowd.

The fisherman hooked another, and jerked him out like the first. And so
it went on to the fourth and the fifth, and the whole regiment might
have melted away but for the order, "Make ready--take aim!"

On seeing the muskets leveled with the regular sound and precise
movement marking evolutions of regular troops, one of the
assailants--there is always some crazy-head to give the signal for
slaughter under such circumstances--fired a pistol at the palace
windows.

During the short space separating "Make ready" and "Fire" in the
command, Pitou guessed what was going to happen.

"Flat on your faces!" he shouted to his men; "down flat, or you are all
dead men!"

Suiting the action to the word, he flung himself on the ground.

Before there was time for his advice to be generally followed, the word
"Fire!" rang in the entrance-way, which was filled with a crashing
noise and smoke, while a hail of lead was spit forth as from one huge
blunderbuss.

The compact mass--for perhaps half the column had entered the
yard--swayed like the wheat-field before the gust, then like the same
cropped by the scythe, reeled and fell down. Hardly a third was left
alive.

These few fled, passing under the fire from two lines of guns and the
barracks firing at close range. The musketeers would have killed each
other but for the thick screen of fugitives between.

This curtain was ripped in wide places; four hundred men were stretched
on the ground pavement, three hundred slain outright.

The hundred, more or less badly injured, groaned and tried to rise, but
falling, gave part of the field of corpses a movement like the ocean
swell, frightful to behold.

But gradually all died out, and apart from a few obstinate fellows who
persisted in living, all fell into immobility.

The fugitives scattered over the Carrousel Square, and flowed out on
the water-side on one hand and on the street by the other, yelling,
"Murder--help! we were drawn into a death-trap."

On the New Bridge, they fell in with the main body. The bulk was
commanded by two men on horseback, closely attended by one on foot, who
seemed to have a share in the command.

"Help, Citizen Santerre!" shouted the flyers, recognizing in one of
the riders the big brewer of St. Antoine, by his colossal stature, for
which his huge Flemish horse was but a pedestal in keeping; "help! they
are slaughtering our brothers."

"Who are?" demanded the brewer-general.

"The Swiss--they shot us down while we were cheek by jowl with them,
a-kissing them."

"What do you think of this?" asked Santerre of the second horseman.

"Vaith, me dink of dot milidary broverb which it say: 'De soldier ought
to march to where he hear dot gun-firing going on,'" replied the other
rider, who was a small, fair man, with his hair cropped short, speaking
with a strong German accent. "Zubbose we go where de goons go off, eh?"

"Hi! you had a young officer with you," called out the leader on foot
to one of the runaways; "I don't see anything of him."

"He was the first to be dropped, citizen representative; and the more's
the pity, for he was a brave young chap."

"Yes, he was a brave young man," replied, with a slight loss of color,
the man addressed as a member of the House, "and he shall be bravely
avenged. On you go, Citizen Santerre!"

"I believe, my dear Billet," said the brewer, "that in such a pinch we
must call experience into play as well as courage."

"As you like."

"In consequence, I propose to place the command in the hands of Citizen
Westerman--a real general and a friend of Danton--offering to obey him
like a common soldier."

"I do not care what you do if you will only march right straight
ahead," said the farmer.

"Do you accept the command, Citizen Westerman?" asked Santerre.

"I do," said the Russian, laconically.

"In that case give your orders."

"Vorwarts!" shouted Westerman, and the immense column, only halted for
a breathing-spell, resumed the route.

As its pioneers entered at the same time the Carrousel by all gates,
eleven struck on the Tuileries clocks.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE LAST OF THE CHARNYS.


When Roederer entered the queen's apartments behind Weber, that lady
was seated by the fire-place, with her back to the door; but she turned
round on hearing it open.

"Well, sir?" she asked, without being very pointed in her inquiry.

"The honor has been done me of a call," replied Roederer.

"Yes, sir; you are one of the principal magistrates of the town,
and your presence here is a shield for royalty. I wish to ask you,
therefore, whether we have most to hope or to fear?"

"Little to hope, madame, and everything to fear."

"The mob is really marching upon the palace?"

"The front of the column is in the Carrousel, parleying with the Swiss
Guards."

"Parleying? but I gave the Swiss the express order to meet brute force
with force. Are they disobeying?"

"Nay, madame; the Swiss will die at their posts."

"And we at ours. The same as the Swiss are soldiers at the service of
kings, kings are the soldiers at the beck of royalty."

Roederer held his peace.

"Have I the misfortune to entertain an opinion not agreeing with yours,
sir?" asked the queen.

"Madame, I have no opinion unless I am asked for it."

"I do ask for it, sir."

"Then I shall state with the frankness of a believer. My opinion is
that the king is ruined if he stays in the Tuileries."

"But if we do not stay here, where shall we go?" cried the queen,
rising in high alarm.

"At present, there is no longer but one place of shelter for the royal
family," responded the attorney-syndic.

"Name it, sir."

"The National Assembly."

"What do you say, sir?" demanded the queen, snapping her eyes and
questioning like one who had not understood.

He repeated what he had said.

"Do you believe, sir, that I would ask a favor of those fellows?"

He was silent again.

"If we must meet enemies, I like those better who attack us in the
broad day and in front, than those who wish to destroy us in the dark
and from behind."

"Well, madame, it is for you to decide; either go and meet the people,
or beat a retreat into the Assembly Hall."

"Beat a retreat? Are we so deprived of defenders that we must retreat
before we have tried the exchange of shots?"

"Perhaps you will take the report, before you come to a conclusion, of
some competent authority who knows the forces you have to dispose of?"

"Weber, bring me one of the principal officers--Maillardet, or
Chesnaye, or--" she stopped on the point of saying "the Count of
Charny."

Weber went out.

"If your majesty were to step up to the window, you would be able to
judge for yourself."

With visible repugnance the lady took the few steps to the window, and,
parting the curtains, saw the Carrousel Square, and the royal yard as
well, crowded with ragged men bearing pikes.

"Good God! what are those fellows doing in here?" she exclaimed.

"I told your majesty--they are parleying."

"But they have entered the inner yards?"

"I thought I had better gain the time somehow for your majesty to come
to a resolution."

The door opened.

"Come, come," cried the queen, without knowing that it would be Charny
who appeared.

"I am here, madame," he said.

"Oh, is it you? Then I have nothing to say, as you told me a while ago
what you thought should be done."

"Then the gentleman thought that the only course was--" said Roederer.

"To die," returned the queen.

"You see that what I propose is preferable, madame."

"Oh! on my soul, I do not know whether it is or not," groaned the queen.

"What does the gentleman suggest?"

"To take the king under the wing of the House."

"That is not death, but shame," said Charny.

"You hear that, sir?" cried the lady.

"Come, come," said the lawyer; "may there not be some middle course?"

Weber stepped forward.

"I am of very little account," he said, "and I know that it is very
bold of me to speak in such company; but my devotion may inspire me.
Suppose that your majesty only requested a deputation to watch over the
safety of the king?"

"Well, I will consent to that. Lord Charny, if you approve of this
suggestion, will you pray submit it to the king?"

Charny bowed and went out.

"Follow the count, Weber, and bring me the king's answer."

Weber went out after the nobleman.

Charny's presence, cold, stern and devoted, was so cruel a reproach
to her as a woman, if not as a sovereign, that she shuddered in it.
Perhaps she had some terrible forewarning of what was to happen.

Weber came back to say that the king accepted the idea.

"Two gentlemen are going to take his majesty's request to the Assembly."

"But look what they are doing!" exclaimed the queen.

The besiegers were busy fishing for Switzers.

Roederer looked out; but he had not the time to see what was in
progress before a pistol-shot was followed by the formidable discharge.
The building shook as though smitten to its foundations.

The queen screamed and fell back a step, but returned to the window,
drawn by curiosity.

"Oh, see, see!" she cried, with flaring eyes, "they fly! they are
routed! Why did you say, that we had no resource but in the Assembly?"

"Will your majesty be good enough to come with me," said the official.

"See, see," continued the queen, "there go the Swiss, making a sortie,
and pursuing them! Oh, the Carrousel is swept free! Victory, victory!"

"In pity for yourself, madame, follow me," persisted Roederer.

Returning to her senses, she went with the attorney-syndic to the
Louvre gallery, where he learned the king was, and which suited his
purpose.

The queen had not an idea of it.

The gallery was barricaded half down, and it was cut through at a third
of the way, where a temporary bridge was thrown across the gap; the
foot of a fugitive might send it down, and so prevent the pursuers
following into the Tuileries.

The king was in a window recess with his captains and some courtiers,
and he held a spy-glass in his hand.

The queen had no need for it as she ran to the balcony.
