almost touched. He could feel her hair blowing on his cheek, and it
thrilled through him like fire. Eric lifted his upper hand; the coin
lay with its head up. Abel stepped forward and took Sarah in his arms.
With a curse Eric hurled the coin far into the sea. Then he leaned
against the flagstaff and scowled at the others with his hands thrust
deep into his pockets. Abel whispered wild words of passion and
delight into Sarah's ears, and as she listened she began to believe
that fortune had rightly interpreted the wishes of her secret heart,
and that she loved Abel best.

Presently Abel looked up and caught sight of Eric's face as the last
ray of sunset struck it. The red light intensified the natural
ruddiness of his complexion, and he looked as though he were steeped
in blood. Abel did not mind his scowl, for now that his own heart was
at rest he could feel unalloyed pity for his friend. He stepped over
meaning to comfort him, and held out his hand, saying:

'It was my chance, old lad. Don't grudge it me. I'll try to make Sarah
a happy woman, and you shall be a brother to us both!'

'Brother be damned!' was all the answer Eric made, as he turned away.
When he had gone a few steps down the rocky path he turned and came
back. Standing before Abel and Sarah, who had their arms round each
other, he said:

'You have a year. Make the most of it! And be sure you're in time to
claim your wife! Be back to have your banns up in time to be married
on the 11th April. If you're not, I tell you I shall have my banns up,
and you may get back too late.'

'What do you mean, Eric? You are mad!'

'No more mad than you are, Abel Behenna. You go, that's your chance! I
stay, that's mine! I don't mean to let the grass grow under my feet.
Sarah cared no more for you than for me five minutes ago, and she may
come back to that five minutes after you're gone! You won by a point
only--the game may change.'

'The game won't change!' said Abel shortly. 'Sarah, you'll be true to
me? You won't marry till I return?'

'For a year!' added Eric, quickly, 'that's the bargain.'

'I promise for the year,' said Sarah. A dark look came over Abel's
face, and he was about to speak, but he mastered himself and smiled.

'I mustn't be too hard or get angry tonight! Come, Eric! we played and
fought together. I won fairly. I played fairly all the game of our
wooing! You know that as well as I do; and now when I am going away, I
shall look to my old and true comrade to help me when I am gone!'

'I'll help you none,' said Eric, 'so help me God!'

'It was God helped me,' said Abel simply.

'Then let Him go on helping you,' said Eric angrily. 'The Devil is
good enough for me!' and without another word he rushed down the steep
path and disappeared behind the rocks.

When he had gone Abel hoped for some tender passage with Sarah, but
the first remark she made chilled him.

'How lonely it all seems without Eric!' and this note sounded till he
had left her at home--and after.

Early on the next morning Abel heard a noise at his door, and on going
out saw Eric walking rapidly away: a small canvas bag full of gold and
silver lay on the threshold; on a small slip of paper pinned to it was
written:

'Take the money and go. I stay. God for you! The Devil for me!
Remember the 11th of April.--ERIC SANSON.' That afternoon Abel went
off to Bristol, and a week later sailed on the _Star of the Sea_ bound
for Pahang. His money--including that which had been Eric's--was on
board in the shape of a venture of cheap toys. He had been advised by
a shrewd old mariner of Bristol whom he knew, and who knew the ways of
the Chersonese, who predicted that every penny invested would be
returned with a shilling to boot.

As the year wore on Sarah became more and more disturbed in her mind.
Eric was always at hand to make love to her in his own persistent,
masterful manner, and to this she did not object. Only one letter came
from Abel, to say that his venture had proved successful, and that he
had sent some two hundred pounds to the bank at Bristol, and was
trading with fifty pounds still remaining in goods for China, whither
the _Star of the Sea_ was bound and whence she would return to
Bristol. He suggested that Eric's share of the venture should be
returned to him with his share of the profits. This proposition was
treated with anger by Eric, and as simply childish by Sarah's mother.

More than six months had since then elapsed, but no other letter had
come, and Eric's hopes which had been dashed down by the letter from
Pahang, began to rise again. He perpetually assailed Sarah with an
'if!' If Abel did not return, would she then marry him? If the 11th
April went by without Abel being in the port, would she give him over?
If Abel had taken his fortune, and married another girl on the head of
it, would she marry him, Eric, as soon as the truth were known? And so
on in an endless variety of possibilities. The power of the strong
will and the determined purpose over the woman's weaker nature became
in time manifest. Sarah began to lose her faith in Abel and to regard
Eric as a possible husband; and a possible husband is in a woman's eye
different to all other men. A new affection for him began to arise in
her breast, and the daily familiarities of permitted courtship
furthered the growing affection. Sarah began to regard Abel as rather
a rock in the road of her life, and had it not been for her mother's
constantly reminding her of the good fortune already laid by in the
Bristol Bank she would have tried to have shut her eyes altogether to
the fact of Abel's existence.

The 11th April was Saturday, so that in order to have the marriage on
that day it would be necessary that the banns should be called on
Sunday, 22nd March. From the beginning of that month Eric kept
perpetually on the subject of Abel's absence, and his outspoken
opinion that the latter was either dead or married began to become a
reality to the woman's mind. As the first half of the month wore on
Eric became more jubilant, and after church on the 15th he took Sarah
for a walk to the Flagstaff Rock. There he asserted himself strongly:

'I told Abel, and you too, that if he was not here to put up his banns
in time for the eleventh, I would put up mine for the twelfth. Now the
time has come when I mean to do it. He hasn't kept his word'--here
Sarah struck in out of her weakness and indecision:

'He hasn't broken it yet!' Eric ground his teeth with anger.

'If you mean to stick up for him,' he said, as he smote his hands
savagely on the flagstaff, which sent forth a shivering murmur, 'well
and good. I'll keep my part of the bargain. On Sunday I shall give
notice of the banns, and you can deny them in the church if you will.
If Abel is in Pencastle on the eleventh, he can have them cancelled,
and his own put up; but till then, I take my course, and woe to anyone
who stands in my way!' With that he flung himself down the rocky
pathway, and Sarah could not but admire his Viking strength and
spirit, as, crossing the hill, he strode away along the cliffs towards
Bude.

During the week no news was heard of Abel, and on Saturday Eric gave
notice of the banns of marriage between himself and Sarah Trefusis.
The clergyman would have remonstrated with him, for although nothing
formal had been told to the neighbours, it had been understood since
Abel's departure that on his return he was to marry Sarah; but Eric
would not discuss the question.

'It is a painful subject, sir,' he said with a firmness which the
parson, who was a very young man, could not but be swayed by. 'Surely
there is nothing against Sarah or me. Why should there be any bones
made about the matter?' The parson said no more, and on the next day
he read out the banns for the first time amidst an audible buzz from
the congregation. Sarah was present, contrary to custom, and though
she blushed furiously enjoyed her triumph over the other girls whose
banns had not yet come. Before the week was over she began to make her
wedding dress. Eric used to come and look at her at work and the sight
thrilled through him. He used to say all sorts of pretty things to her
at such times, and there were to both delicious moments of
love-making.

The banns were read a second time on the 29th, and Eric's hope grew
more and more fixed though there were to him moments of acute despair
when he realised that the cup of happiness might be dashed from his
lips at any moment, right up to the last. At such times he was full of
passion--desperate and remorseless--and he ground his teeth and
clenched his hands in a wild way as though some taint of the old
Berserker fury of his ancestors still lingered in his blood. On the
Thursday of that week he looked in on Sarah and found her, amid a
flood of sunshine, putting finishing touches to her white wedding
gown. His own heart was full of gaiety, and the sight of the woman who
was so soon to be his own so occupied, filled him with a joy
unspeakable, and he felt faint with languorous ecstasy. Bending over
he kissed Sarah on the mouth, and then whispered in her rosy ear--

'Your wedding dress, Sarah! And for me!' As he drew back to admire her
she looked up saucily, and said to him--

'Perhaps not for you. There is more than a week yet for Abel!' and
then cried out in dismay, for with a wild gesture and a fierce oath
Eric dashed out of the house, banging the door behind him. The
incident disturbed Sarah more than she could have thought possible,
for it awoke all her fears and doubts and indecision afresh. She cried
a little, and put by her dress, and to soothe herself went out to sit
for a while on the summit of the Flagstaff Rock. When she arrived she
found there a little group anxiously discussing the weather. The sea
was calm and the sun bright, but across the sea were strange lines of
darkness and light, and close in to shore the rocks were fringed with
foam, which spread out in great white curves and circles as the
currents drifted. The wind had backed, and came in sharp, cold puffs.
The blow-hole, which ran under the Flagstaff Rock, from the rocky bay
without to the harbour within, was booming at intervals, and the
seagulls were screaming ceaselessly as they wheeled about the entrance
of the port.

'It looks bad,' she heard an old fisherman say to the coastguard. 'I
seen it just like this once before, when the East Indiaman
_Coromandel_ went to pieces in Dizzard Bay!' Sarah did not wait to
hear more. She was of a timid nature where danger was concerned, and
could not bear to hear of wrecks and disasters. She went home and
resumed the completion of her dress, secretly determined to appease
Eric when she should meet him with a sweet apology--and to take the
earliest opportunity of being even with him after her marriage. The
old fisherman's weather prophecy was justified. That night at dusk a
wild storm came on. The sea rose and lashed the western coasts from
Skye to Scilly and left a tale of disaster everywhere. The sailors and
fishermen of Pencastle all turned out on the rocks and cliffs and
watched eagerly. Presently, by a flash of lightning, a 'ketch' was
seen drifting under only a jib about half-a-mile outside the port. All
eyes and all glasses were concentrated on her, waiting for the next
flash, and when it came a chorus went up that it was the _Lovely
Alice_, trading between Bristol and Penzance, and touching at all the
little ports between. 'God help them!' said the harbour-master, 'for
nothing in this world can save them when they are between Bude and
Tintagel and the wind on shore!' The coastguards exerted themselves,
and, aided by brave hearts and willing hands, they brought the rocket
apparatus up on the summit of the Flagstaff Rock. Then they burned
blue lights so that those on board might see the harbour opening in
case they could make any effort to reach it. They worked gallantly
enough on board; but no skill or strength of man could avail. Before
many minutes were over the _Lovely Alice_ rushed to her doom on the
great island rock that guarded the mouth of the port. The screams of
those on board were faintly borne on the tempest as they flung
themselves into the sea in a last chance for life. The blue lights
were kept burning, and eager eyes peered into the depths of the waters
in case any face could be seen; and ropes were held ready to fling out
in aid. But never a face was seen, and the willing arms rested idle.
Eric was there amongst his fellows. His old Icelandic origin was
never more apparent than in that wild hour. He took a rope, and
shouted in the ear of the harbour-master:

'I shall go down on the rock over the seal cave. The tide is running
up, and someone may drift in there!'

'Keep back, man!' came the answer. 'Are you mad? One slip on that rock
and you are lost: and no man could keep his feet in the dark on such a
place in such a tempest!'

'Not a bit,' came the reply. 'You remember how Abel Behenna saved me
there on a night like this when my boat went on the Gull Rock. He
dragged me up from the deep water in the seal cave, and now someone
may drift in there again as I did,' and he was gone into the darkness.
The projecting rock hid the light on the Flagstaff Rock, but he knew
his way too well to miss it. His boldness and sureness of foot
standing to him, he shortly stood on the great round-topped rock cut
away beneath by the action of the waves over the entrance of the seal
cave, where the water was fathomless. There he stood in comparative
safety, for the concave shape of the rock beat back the waves with
their own force, and though the water below him seemed to boil like a
seething cauldron, just beyond the spot there was a space of almost
calm. The rock, too, seemed here to shut off the sound of the gale,
and he listened as well as watched. As he stood there ready, with his
coil of rope poised to throw, he thought he heard below him, just
beyond the whirl of the water, a faint, despairing cry. He echoed it
with a shout that rang into the night. Then he waited for the flash of
lightning, and as it passed flung his rope out into the darkness where
he had seen a face rising through the swirl of the foam. The rope was
caught, for he felt a pull on it, and he shouted again in his mighty
voice:

'Tie it round your waist, and I shall pull you up.' Then when he felt
that it was fast he moved along the rock to the far side of the sea
cave, where the deep water was something stiller, and where he could
get foothold secure enough to drag the rescued man on the overhanging
rock. He began to pull, and shortly he knew from the rope taken in
that the man he was now rescuing must soon be close to the top of the
rock. He steadied himself for a moment, and drew a long breath, that
he might at the next effort complete the rescue. He had just bent his
back to the work when a flash of lightning revealed to each other the
two men--the rescuer and the rescued.

Eric Sanson and Abel Behenna were face to face--and none knew of the
meeting save themselves; and God.

On the instant a wave of passion swept through Eric's heart. All his
hopes were shattered, and with the hatred of Cain his eyes looked out.
He saw in the instant of recognition the joy in Abel's face that his
was the hand to succour him, and this intensified his hate. Whilst the
passion was on him he started back, and the rope ran out between his
hands. His moment of hate was followed by an impulse of his better
manhood, but it was too late.

Before he could recover himself, Abel encumbered with the rope that
should have aided him, was plunged with a despairing cry back into the
darkness of the devouring sea.

Then, feeling all the madness and the doom of Cain upon him, Eric
rushed back over the rocks, heedless of the danger and eager only for
one thing--to be amongst other people whose living noises would shut
out that last cry which seemed to ring still in his ears. When he
regained the Flagstaff Rock the men surrounded him, and through the
fury of the storm he heard the harbour-master say:--

'We feared you were lost when we heard a cry! How white you are! Where
is your rope? Was there anyone drifted in?'

'No one,' he shouted in answer, for he felt that he could never
explain that he had let his old comrade slip back into the sea, and at
the very place and under the very circumstances in which that comrade
had saved his own life. He hoped by one bold lie to set the matter at
rest for ever. There was no one to bear witness--and if he should have
to carry that still white face in his eyes and that despairing cry in
his ears for evermore--at least none should know of it. 'No one,' he
cried, more loudly still. 'I slipped on the rock, and the rope fell
into the sea!' So saying he left them, and, rushing down the steep
path, gained his own cottage and locked himself within.

The remainder of that night he passed lying on his bed--dressed and
motionless--staring upwards, and seeming to see through the darkness a
pale face gleaming wet in the lightning, with its glad recognition
turning to ghastly despair, and to hear a cry which never ceased to
echo in his soul.

In the morning the storm was over and all was smiling again, except
that the sea was still boisterous with its unspent fury. Great pieces
of wreck drifted into the port, and the sea around the island rock was
strewn with others. Two bodies also drifted into the harbour--one the
master of the wrecked ketch, the other a strange seaman whom no one
knew.

Sarah saw nothing of Eric till the evening, and then he only looked
in for a minute. He did not come into the house, but simply put his
head in through the open window.

'Well, Sarah,' he called out in a loud voice, though to her it did not
ring truly, 'is the wedding dress done? Sunday week, mind! Sunday
week!'

Sarah was glad to have the reconciliation so easy; but, womanlike,
when she saw the storm was over and her own fears groundless, she at
once repeated the cause of offence.

'Sunday so be it,' she said without looking up, 'if Abel isn't there
on Saturday!' Then she looked up saucily, though her heart was full of
fear of another outburst on the part of her impetuous lover. But the
window was empty; Eric had taken himself off, and with a pout she
resumed her work. She saw Eric no more till Sunday afternoon, after
the banns had been called the third time, when he came up to her
before all the people with an air of proprietorship which half-pleased
and half-annoyed her.

'Not yet, mister!' she said, pushing him away, as the other girls
giggled. 'Wait till Sunday next, if you please--the day after
Saturday!' she added, looking at him saucily. The girls giggled again,
and the young men guffawed. They thought it was the snub that touched
him so that he became as white as a sheet as he turned away. But
Sarah, who knew more than they did, laughed, for she saw triumph
through the spasm of pain that overspread his face.

The week passed uneventfully; however, as Saturday drew nigh Sarah had
occasional moments of anxiety, and as to Eric he went about at
night-time like a man possessed. He restrained himself when others
were by, but now and again he went down amongst the rocks and caves
and shouted aloud. This seemed to relieve him somewhat, and he was
better able to restrain himself for some time after. All Saturday he
stayed in his own house and never left it. As he was to be married on
the morrow, the neighbours thought it was shyness on his part, and did
not trouble or notice him. Only once was he disturbed, and that was
when the chief boatman came to him and sat down, and after a pause
said:

'Eric, I was over in Bristol yesterday. I was in the ropemaker's
getting a coil to replace the one you lost the night of the storm, and
there I saw Michael Heavens of this place, who is a salesman there. He
told me that Abel Behenna had come home the week ere last on the _Star
of the Sea_ from Canton, and that he had lodged a sight of money in
the Bristol Bank in the name of Sarah Behenna. He told Michael so
himself--and that he had taken passage on the _Lovely Alice_ to
Pencastle. 'Bear up, man,' for Eric had with a groan dropped his head
on his knees, with his face between his hands. 'He was your old
comrade, I know, but you couldn't help him. He must have gone down
with the rest that awful night. I thought I'd better tell you, lest it
might come some other way, and you might keep Sarah Trefusis from
being frightened. They were good friends once, and women take these
things to heart. It would not do to let her be pained with such a
thing on her wedding day!' Then he rose and went away, leaving Eric
still sitting disconsolately with his head on his knees.

'Poor fellow!' murmured the chief boatman to himself; 'he takes it to
heart. Well, well! right enough! They were true comrades once, and
Abel saved him!'

The afternoon of that day, when the children had left school, they
strayed as usual on half-holidays along' the quay and the paths by the
cliffs. Presently some of them came running in a state of great
excitement to the harbour, where a few men were unloading a coal
ketch, and a great many were superintending the operation. One of the
children called out:

'There is a porpoise in the harbour mouth! We saw it come through the
blow-hole! It had a long tail, and was deep under the water!'

'It was no porpoise,' said another; 'it was a seal; but it had a long
tail! It came out of the seal cave!' The other children bore various
testimony, but on two points they were unanimous--it, whatever 'it'
was, had come through the blow-hole deep under the water, and had a
long, thin tail--a tail so long that they could not see the end of it.
There was much unmerciful chaffing of the children by the men on this
point, but as it was evident that they had seen something, quite a
number of persons, young and old, male and female, went along the high
paths on either side of the harbour mouth to catch a glimpse of this
new addition to the fauna of the sea, a long-tailed porpoise or seal.
The tide was now coming in. There was a slight breeze, and the surface
of the water was rippled so that it was only at moments that anyone
could see clearly into the deep water. After a spell of watching a
woman called out that she saw something moving up the channel, just
below where she was standing. There was a stampede to the spot, but by
the time the crowd had gathered the breeze had freshened, and it was
impossible to see with any distinctness below the surface of the
water. On being questioned the woman described what she had seen, but
in such an incoherent way that the whole thing was put down as an
effect of imagination; had it not been for the children's report she
would not have been credited at all. Her semi-hysterical statement
that what she saw was 'like a pig with the entrails out' was only
thought anything of by an old coastguard, who shook his head but did
not make any remark. For the remainder of the daylight this man was
seen always on the bank, looking into the water, but always with
disappointment manifest on his face.

Eric arose early on the next morning--he had not slept all night, and
it was a relief to him to move about in the light. He shaved himself
with a hand that did not tremble, and dressed himself in his wedding
clothes. There was a haggard look on his face, and he seemed as though
he had grown years older in the last few days. Still there was a wild,
uneasy light of triumph in his eyes, and he kept murmuring to himself
over and over again:

'This is my wedding-day! Abel cannot claim her now--living or
dead!--living or dead! Living or dead!' He sat in his arm-chair,
waiting with an uncanny quietness for the church hour to arrive. When
the bell began to ring he arose and passed out of his house, closing
the door behind him. He looked at the river and saw the tide had just
turned. In the church he sat with Sarah and her mother, holding
Sarah's hand tightly in his all the time, as though he feared to lose
her. When the service was over they stood up together, and were
married in the presence of the entire congregation; for no one left
the church. Both made the responses clearly--Eric's being even on the
defiant side. When the wedding was over Sarah took her husband's arm,
and they walked away together, the boys and younger girls being cuffed
by their elders into a decorous behaviour, for they would fain have
followed close behind their heels.

The way from the church led down to the back of Eric's cottage, a
narrow passage being between it and that of his next neighbour. When
the bridal couple had passed through this the remainder of the
congregation, who had followed them at a little distance, were
startled by a long, shrill scream from the bride. They rushed through
the passage and found her on the bank with wild eyes, pointing to the
river bed opposite Eric Sanson's door.

The falling tide had deposited there the body of Abel Behenna stark
upon the broken rocks. The rope trailing from its waist had been
twisted by the current round the mooring post, and had held it back
whilst the tide had ebbed away from it. The right elbow had fallen in
a chink in the rock, leaving the hand outstretched toward Sarah, with
the open palm upward as though it were extended to receive hers, the
pale drooping fingers open to the clasp.

All that happened afterwards was never quite known to Sarah Sanson.
Whenever she would try to recollect there would become a buzzing in
her ears and a dimness in her eyes, and all would pass away. The only
thing that she could remember of it all--and this she never
forgot--was Eric's breathing heavily, with his face whiter than that
of the dead man, as he muttered under his breath:

'Devil's help! Devil's faith! Devil's price!'




The Burial of the Rats


Leaving Paris by the Orleans road, cross the Enceinte, and, turning to
the right, you find yourself in a somewhat wild and not at all savoury
district. Right and left, before and behind, on every side rise great
heaps of dust and waste accumulated by the process of time.

Paris has its night as well as its day life, and the sojourner who
enters his hotel in the Rue de Rivoli or the Rue St. Honore late at
night or leaves it early in the morning, can guess, in coming near
Montrouge--if he has not done so already--the purpose of those great
waggons that look like boilers on wheels which he finds halting
everywhere as he passes.

Every city has its peculiar institutions created out of its own needs;
and one of the most notable institutions of Paris is its rag-picking
population. In the early morning--and Parisian life commences at an
early hour--may be seen in most streets standing on the pathway
opposite every court and alley and between every few houses, as still
in some American cities, even in parts of New York, large wooden boxes
into which the domestics or tenement-holders empty the accumulated
dust of the past day. Round these boxes gather and pass on, when the
work is done, to fresh fields of labour and pastures new, squalid
hungry-looking men and women, the implements of whose craft consist
of a coarse bag or basket slung over the shoulder and a little rake
with which they turn over and probe and examine in the minutest manner
the dustbins. They pick up and deposit in their baskets, by aid of
their rakes, whatever they may find, with the same facility as a
Chinaman uses his chopsticks.

Paris is a city of centralisation--and centralisation and
classification are closely allied. In the early times, when
centralisation is becoming a fact, its forerunner is classification.
All things which are similar or analogous become grouped together, and
from the grouping of groups rises one whole or central point. We see
radiating many long arms with innumerable tentaculae, and in the
centre rises a gigantic head with a comprehensive brain and keen eyes
to look on every side and ears sensitive to hear--and a voracious
mouth to swallow.

Other cities resemble all the birds and beasts and fishes whose
appetites and digestions are normal. Paris alone is the analogical
apotheosis of the octopus. Product of centralisation carried to an _ad
absurdum_, it fairly represents the devil fish; and in no respects is
the resemblance more curious than in the similarity of the digestive
apparatus.

Those intelligent tourists who, having surrendered their individuality
into the hands of Messrs. Cook or Gaze, 'do' Paris in three days, are
often puzzled to know how it is that the dinner which in London would
cost about six shillings, can be had for three francs in a café in the
Palais Royal. They need have no more wonder if they will but consider
the classification which is a theoretic speciality of Parisian life,
and adopt all round the fact from which the chiffonier has his
genesis.

The Paris of 1850 was not like the Paris of to-day, and those who see
the Paris of Napoleon and Baron Hausseman can hardly realise the
existence of the state of things forty-five years ago.

Amongst other things, however, which have not changed are those
districts where the waste is gathered. Dust is dust all the world
over, in every age, and the family likeness of dust-heaps is perfect.
The traveller, therefore, who visits the environs of Montrouge can go
go back in fancy without difficulty to the year 1850.

In this year I was making a prolonged stay in Paris. I was very much
in love with a young lady who, though she returned my passion, so far
yielded to the wishes of her parents that she had promised not to see
me or to correspond with me for a year. I, too, had been compelled to
accede to these conditions under a vague hope of parental approval.
During the term of probation I had promised to remain out of the
country and not to write to my dear one until the expiration of the
year.

Naturally the time went heavily with me. There was not one of my own
family or circle who could tell me of Alice, and none of her own folk
had, I am sorry to say, sufficient generosity to send me even an
occasional word of comfort regarding her health and well-being. I
spent six months wandering about Europe, but as I could find no
satisfactory distraction in travel, I determined to come to Paris,
where, at least, I would be within easy hail of London in case any
good fortune should call me thither before the appointed time. That
'hope deferred maketh the heart sick' was never better exemplified
than in my case, for in addition to the perpetual longing to see the
face I loved there was always with me a harrowing anxiety lest some
accident should prevent me showing Alice in due time that I had,
throughout the long period of probation, been faithful to her trust
and my own love. Thus, every adventure which I undertook had a fierce
pleasure of its own, for it was fraught with possible consequences
greater than it would have ordinarily borne.

Like all travellers I exhausted the places of most interest in the
first month of my stay, and was driven in the second month to look for
amusement whithersoever I might. Having made sundry journeys to the
better-known suburbs, I began to see that there was a _terra
incognita_, in so far as the guide book was concerned, in the social
wilderness lying between these attractive points. Accordingly I began
to systematise my researches, and each day took up the thread of my
exploration at the place where I had on the previous day dropped it.

In the process of time my wanderings led me near Montrouge, and I saw
that hereabouts lay the Ultima Thule of social exploration--a country
as little known as that round the source of the White Nile. And so I
determined to investigate philosophically the chiffonier--his habitat,
his life, and his means of life.

The job was an unsavoury one, difficult of accomplishment, and with
little hope of adequate reward. However, despite reason, obstinacy
prevailed, and I entered into my new investigation with a keener
energy than I could have summoned to aid me in any investigation
leading to any end, valuable or worthy.

One day, late in a fine afternoon, toward the end of September, I
entered the holy of holies of the city of dust. The place was
evidently the recognised abode of a number of chiffoniers, for some
sort of arrangement was manifested in the formation of the dust heaps
near the road. I passed amongst these heaps, which stood like orderly
sentries, determined to penetrate further and trace dust to its
ultimate location.

As I passed along I saw behind the dust heaps a few forms that flitted
to and fro, evidently watching with interest the advent of any
stranger to such a place. The district was like a small Switzerland,
and as I went forward my tortuous course shut out the path behind me.

Presently I got into what seemed a small city or community of
chiffoniers. There were a number of shanties or huts, such as may be
met with in the remote parts of the Bog of Allan--rude places with
wattled walls, plastered with mud and roofs of rude thatch made from
stable refuse--such places as one would not like to enter for any
consideration, and which even in water-colour could only look
picturesque if judiciously treated. In the midst of these huts was one
of the strangest adaptations--I cannot say habitations--I had ever
seen. An immense old wardrobe, the colossal remnant of some boudoir of
Charles VII, or Henry II, had been converted into a dwelling-house.
The double doors lay open, so that the entire ménage was open to
public view. In the open half of the wardrobe was a common
sitting-room of some four feet by six, in which sat, smoking their
pipes round a charcoal brazier, no fewer than six old soldiers of the
First Republic, with their uniforms torn and worn threadbare.
Evidently they were of the _mauvais sujet_ class; their bleary eyes
and limp jaws told plainly of a common love of absinthe; and their
eyes had that haggard, worn look of slumbering ferocity which follows
hard in the wake of drink. The other side stood as of old, with its
shelves intact, save that they were cut to half their depth, and in
each shelf of which there were six, was a bed made with rags and
straw. The half-dozen of worthies who inhabited this structure looked
at me curiously as I passed; and when I looked back after going a
little way I saw their heads together in a whispered conference. I did
not like the look of this at all, for the place was very lonely, and
the men looked very, very villainous. However, I did not see any cause
for fear, and went on my way, penetrating further and further into the
Sahara. The way was tortuous to a degree, and from going round in a
series of semi-circles, as one goes in skating with the Dutch roll, I
got rather confused with regard to the points of the compass.

When I had penetrated a little way I saw, as I turned the corner of a
half-made heap, sitting on a heap of straw an old soldier with
threadbare coat.

'Hallo!' said I to myself; 'the First Republic is well represented
here in its soldiery.'

As I passed him the old man never even looked up at me, but gazed on
the ground with stolid persistency. Again I remarked to myself: 'See
what a life of rude warfare can do! This old man's curiosity is a
thing of the past.'

When I had gone a few steps, however, I looked back suddenly, and saw
that curiosity was not dead, for the veteran had raised his head and
was regarding me with a very queer expression. He seemed to me to look
very like one of the six worthies in the press. When he saw me looking
he dropped his head; and without thinking further of him I went on my
way, satisfied that there was a strange likeness between these old
warriors.

Presently I met another old soldier in a similar manner. He, too, did
not notice me whilst I was passing.

By this time it was getting late in the afternoon, and I began to
think of retracing my steps. Accordingly I turned to go back, but
could see a number of tracks leading between different mounds and
could not ascertain which of them I should take. In my perplexity I
wanted to see someone of whom to ask the way, but could see no one. I
determined to go on a few mounds further and so try to see
someone--not a veteran.

I gained my object, for after going a couple of hundred yards I saw
before me a single shanty such as I had seen before--with, however,
the difference that this was not one for living in, but merely a roof
with three walls open in front. From the evidences which the
neighbourhood exhibited I took it to be a place for sorting. Within it
was an old woman wrinkled and bent with age; I approached her to ask
the way.

She rose as I came close and I asked her my way. She immediately
commenced a conversation; and it occurred to me that here in the very
centre of the Kingdom of Dust was the place to gather details of the
history of Parisian rag-picking--particularly as I could do so from
the lips of one who looked like the oldest inhabitant.

I began my inquiries, and the old woman gave me most interesting
answers--she had been one of the ceteuces who sat daily before the
guillotine and had taken an active part among the women who signalised
themselves by their violence in the revolution. While we were talking
she said suddenly: 'But m'sieur must be tired standing,' and dusted a
rickety old stool for me to sit down. I hardly liked to do so for many
reasons; but the poor old woman was so civil that I did not like to
run the risk of hurting her by refusing, and moreover the conversation
of one who had been at the taking of the Bastille was so interesting
that I sat down and so our conversation went on.

While we were talking an old man--older and more bent and wrinkled
even than the woman--appeared from behind the shanty. 'Here is
Pierre,' said she. 'M'sieur can hear stories now if he wishes, for
Pierre was in everything, from the Bastille to Waterloo.' The old man
took another stool at my request and we plunged into a sea of
revolutionary reminiscences. This old man, albeit clothed like a
scarecrow, was like any one of the six veterans.

I was now sitting in the centre of the low hut with the woman on my
left hand and the man on my right, each of them being somewhat in
front of me. The place was full of all sorts of curious objects of
lumber, and of many things that I wished far away. In one corner was a
heap of rags which seemed to move from the number of vermin it
contained, and in the other a heap of bones whose odour was something
shocking. Every now and then, glancing at the heaps, I could see the
gleaming eyes of some of the rats which infested the place. These
loathsome objects were bad enough, but what looked even more dreadful
was an old butcher's axe with an iron handle stained with clots of
blood leaning up against the wall on the right hand side. Still, these
things did not give me much concern. The talk of the two old people
was so fascinating that I stayed on and on, till the evening came and
the dust heaps threw dark shadows over the vales between them.

After a time I began to grow uneasy. I could not tell how or why, but
somehow I did not feel satisfied. Uneasiness is an instinct and means
warning. The psychic faculties are often the sentries of the
intellect, and when they sound alarm the reason begins to act,
although perhaps not consciously.

This was so with me. I began to bethink me where I was and by what
surrounded, and to wonder how I should fare in case I should be
attacked; and then the thought suddenly burst upon me, although
without any overt cause, that I was in danger. Prudence whispered: 'Be
still and make no sign,' and so I was still and made no sign, for I
knew that four cunning eyes were on me. 'Four eyes--if not more.' My
God, what a horrible thought! The whole shanty might be surrounded on
three sides with villains! I might be in the midst of a band of such
desperadoes as only half a century of periodic revolution can produce.

With a sense of danger my intellect and observation quickened, and I
grew more watchful than was my wont. I noticed that the old woman's
eyes were constantly wandering towards my hands. I looked at them too,
and saw the cause--my rings. On my left little finger I had a large
signet and on the right a good diamond.

I thought that if there was any danger my first care was to avert
suspicion. Accordingly I began to work the conversation round to
rag-picking--to the drains--of the things found there; and so by easy
stages to jewels. Then, seizing a favourable opportunity, I asked the
old woman if she knew anything of such things. She answered that she
did, a little. I held out my right hand, and, showing her the diamond,
asked her what she thought of that. She answered that her eyes were
bad, and stooped over my hand. I said as nonchalantly as I could:
'Pardon me! You will see better thus!' and taking it off handed it to
her. An unholy light came into her withered old face, as she touched
it. She stole one glance at me swift and keen as a flash of lightning.

She bent over the ring for a moment, her face quite concealed as
though examining it. The old man looked straight out of the front of
the shanty before him, at the same time fumbling in his pockets and
producing a screw of tobacco in a paper and a pipe, which he proceeded
to fill. I took advantage of the pause and the momentary rest from the
searching eyes on my face to look carefully round the place, now dim
and shadowy in the gloaming. There still lay all the heaps of varied
reeking foulness; there the terrible blood-stained axe leaning against
the wall in the right hand corner, and everywhere, despite the gloom,
the baleful glitter of the eyes of the rats. I could see them even
through some of the chinks of the boards at the back low down close to
the ground. But stay! these latter eyes seemed more than usually large
and bright and baleful!

For an instant my heart stood still, and I felt in that whirling
condition of mind in which one feels a sort of spiritual drunkenness,
and as though the body is only maintained erect in that there is no
time for it to fall before recovery. Then, in another second, I was
calm--coldly calm, with all my energies in full vigour, with a
self-control which I felt to be perfect and with all my feeling and
instincts alert.

Now I knew the full extent of my danger: I was watched and surrounded
by desperate people! I could not even guess at how many of them were
lying there on the ground behind the shanty, waiting for the moment to
strike. I knew that I was big and strong, and they knew it, too. They
knew also, as I did, that I was an Englishman and would make a fight
for it; and so we waited. I had, I felt, gained an advantage in the
last few seconds, for I knew my danger and understood the situation.
Now, I thought, is the test of my courage--the enduring test: the
fighting test may come later!

The old woman raised her head and said to me in a satisfied kind of
way:

'A very fine ring, indeed--a beautiful ring! Oh, me! I once had such
rings, plenty of them, and bracelets and earrings! Oh! for in those
fine days I led the town a dance! But they've forgotten me now!
They've forgotten me! They? Why they never heard of me! Perhaps their
grandfathers remember me, some of them!' and she laughed a harsh,
croaking laugh. And then I am bound to say that she astonished me, for
she handed me back the ring with a certain suggestion of old-fashioned
grace which was not without its pathos.

The old man eyed her with a sort of sudden ferocity, half rising from
his stool, and said to me suddenly and hoarsely:

'Let me see!'

I was about to hand the ring when the old woman said:

'No! no, do not give it to Pierre! Pierre is eccentric. He loses
things; and such a pretty ring!'

'Cat!' said the old man, savagely. Suddenly the old woman said, rather
more loudly than was necessary:

'Wait! I shall tell you something about a ring.' There was something
in the sound of her voice that jarred upon me. Perhaps it was my
hyper-sensitiveness, wrought up as I was to such a pitch of nervous
excitement, but I seemed to think that she was not addressing me. As I
stole a glance round the place I saw the eyes of the rats in the bone
heaps, but missed the eyes along the back. But even as I looked I saw
them again appear. The old woman's 'Wait!' had given me a respite from
attack, and the men had sunk back to their reclining posture.

'I once lost a ring--a beautiful diamond hoop that had belonged to a
queen, and which was given to me by a farmer of the taxes, who
afterwards cut his throat because I sent him away. I thought it must
have been stolen, and taxed my people; but I could get no trace. The
police came and suggested that it had found its way to the drain. We
descended--I in my fine clothes, for I would not trust them with my
beautiful ring! I know more of the drains since then, and of rats,
too! but I shall never forget the horror of that place--alive with
blazing eyes, a wall of them just outside the light of our torches.
Well, we got beneath my house. We searched the outlet of the drain,
and there in the filth found my ring, and we came out.

'But we found something else also before we came! As we were coming
toward the opening a lot of sewer rats--human ones this time--came
towards us. They told the police that one of their number had gone
into the drain, but had not returned. He had gone in only shortly
before we had, and, if lost, could hardly be far off. They asked help
to seek him, so we turned back. They tried to prevent me going, but I
insisted. It was a new excitement, and had I not recovered my ring?
Not far did we go till we came on something. There was but little
water, and the bottom of the drain was raised with brick, rubbish, and
much matter of the kind. He had made a fight for it, even when his
torch had gone out. But they were too many for him! They had not been
long about it! The bones were still warm; but they were picked clean.
They had even eaten their own dead ones and there were bones of rats
as well as of the man. They took it cool enough those other--the human
ones--and joked of their comrade when they found him dead, though they
would have helped him living. Bah! what matters it--life or death?'

'And had you no fear?' I asked her.

'Fear!' she said with a laugh. 'Me have fear? Ask Pierre! But I was
younger then, and, as I came through that horrible drain with its wall
of greedy eyes, always moving with the circle of the light from the
torches, I did not feel easy. I kept on before the men, though! It is
a way I have! I never let the men get it before me. All I want is a
chance and a means! And they ate him up--took every trace away except
the bones; and no one knew it, nor no sound of him was ever heard!'
Here she broke into a chuckling fit of the ghastliest merriment which
it was ever my lot to hear and see. A great poetess describes her
heroine singing: 'Oh! to see or hear her singing! Scarce I know which
is the divinest.'

And I can apply the same idea to the old crone--in all save the
divinity, for I scarce could tell which was the most hellish--the
harsh, malicious, satisfied, cruel laugh, or the leering grin, and the
horrible square opening of the mouth like a tragic mask, and the
yellow gleam of the few discoloured teeth in the shapeless gums. In
that laugh and with that grin and the chuckling satisfaction I knew as
well as if it had been spoken to me in words of thunder that my murder
was settled, and the murderers only bided the proper time for its
accomplishment. I could read between the lines of her gruesome story
the commands to her accomplices. 'Wait,' she seemed to say, 'bide your
time. I shall strike the first blow. Find the weapon for me, and I
shall make the opportunity! He shall not escape! Keep him quiet, and
then no one will be wiser. There will be no outcry, and the rats will
do their work!'

It was growing darker and darker; the night was coming. I stole a
glance round the shanty, still all the same! The bloody axe in the
corner, the heaps of filth, and the eyes on the bone heaps and in the
crannies of the floor.

Pierre had been still ostensibly filling his pipe; he now struck a
light and began to puff away at it. The old woman said:

'Dear heart, how dark it is! Pierre, like a good lad, light the lamp!'

Pierre got up and with the lighted match in his hand touched the wick
of a lamp which hung at one side of the entrance to the shanty, and
which had a reflector that threw the light all over the place. It was
evidently that which was used for their sorting at night.

'Not that, stupid! Not that! the lantern!' she called out to him.

He immediately blew it out, saying: 'All right, mother I'll find it,'
and he hustled about the left corner of the room--the old woman saying
through the darkness:

'The lantern! the lantern! Oh! That is the light that is most useful to
us poor folks. The lantern was the friend of the revolution! It is the
friend of the chiffonier! It helps us when all else fails.'

Hardly had she said the word when there was a kind of creaking of the
whole place, and something was steadily dragged over the roof.

Again I seemed to read between the lines of her words. I knew the
lesson of the lantern.

'One of you get on the roof with a noose and strangle him as he passes
out if we fail within.'

As I looked out of the opening I saw the loop of a rope outlined black
against the lurid sky. I was now, indeed, beset!

Pierre was not long in finding the lantern. I kept my eyes fixed
through the darkness on the old woman. Pierre struck his light, and by
its flash I saw the old woman raise from the ground beside her where
it had mysteriously appeared, and then hide in the folds of her gown,
a long sharp knife or dagger. It seemed to be like a butcher's
sharpening iron fined to a keen point.

The lantern was lit.

'Bring it here, Pierre,' she said. 'Place it in the doorway where we
can see it. See how nice it is! It shuts out the darkness from us; it
is just right!'

Just right for her and her purposes! It threw all its light on my
face, leaving in gloom the faces of both Pierre and the woman, who sat
outside of me on each side.

I felt that the time of action was approaching, but I knew now that
the first signal and movement would come from the woman, and so
watched her.

I was all unarmed, but I had made up my mind what to do. At the first
movement I would seize the butcher's axe in the right-hand corner and
fight my way out. At least, I would die hard. I stole a glance round
to fix its exact locality so that I could not fail to seize it at the
first effort, for then, if ever, time and accuracy would be precious.

Good God! It was gone! All the horror of the situation burst upon me;
but the bitterest thought of all was that if the issue of the terrible
position should be against me Alice would infallibly suffer. Either
she would believe me false--and any lover, or any one who has ever
been one, can imagine the bitterness of the thought--or else she would
go on loving long after I had been lost to her and to the world, so
that her life would be broken and embittered, shattered with
disappointment and despair. The very magnitude of the pain braced me
up and nerved me to bear the dread scrutiny of the plotters.

I think I did not betray myself. The old woman was watching me as a
cat does a mouse; she had her right hand hidden in the folds of her
gown, clutching, I knew, that long, cruel-looking dagger. Had she seen
any disappointment in my face she would, I felt, have known that the
moment had come, and would have sprung on me like a tigress, certain
of taking me unprepared.

I looked out into the night, and there I saw new cause for danger.
Before and around the hut were at a little distance some shadowy
forms; they were quite still, but I knew that they were all alert and
on guard. Small chance for me now in that direction.

Again I stole a glance round the place. In moments of great excitement
and of great danger, which is excitement, the mind works very quickly,
and the keenness of the faculties which depend on the mind grows in
proportion. I now felt this. In an instant I took in the whole
situation. I saw that the axe had been taken through a small hole made
in one of the rotten boards. How rotten they must be to allow of such
a thing being done without a particle of noise.

The hut was a regular murder-trap, and was guarded all around. A
garroter lay on the roof ready to entangle me with his noose if I
should escape the dagger of the old hag. In front the way was guarded
by I know not how many watchers. And at the back was a row of
desperate men--I had seen their eyes still through the crack in the
boards of the floor, when last I looked--as they lay prone waiting for
the signal to start erect. If it was to be ever, now for it!

As nonchalantly as I could I turned slightly on my stool so as to get
my right leg well under me. Then with a sudden jump, turning my head,
and guarding it with my hands, and with the fighting instinct of the
knights of old, I breathed my lady's name, and hurled myself against
the back wall of the hut.

Watchful as they were, the suddenness of my movement surprised both
Pierre and the old woman. As I crashed through the rotten timbers I
saw the old woman rise with a leap like a tiger and heard her low gasp
of baffled rage. My feet lit on something that moved, and as I jumped
away I knew that I had stepped on the back of one of the row of men
lying on their faces outside the hut. I was torn with nails and
splinters, but otherwise unhurt. Breathless I rushed up the mound in
front of me, hearing as I went the dull crash of the shanty as it
collapsed into a mass.

It was a nightmare climb. The mound, though but low, was awfully
steep, and with each step I took the mass of dust and cinders tore
down with me and gave way under my feet. The dust rose and choked me;
it was sickening, foetid, awful; but my climb was, I felt, for life or
death, and I struggled on. The seconds seemed hours; but the few
moments I had in starting, combined with my youth and strength, gave
me a great advantage, and, though several forms struggled after me in
deadly silence which was more dreadful than any sound, I easily
reached the top. Since then I have climbed the cone of Vesuvius, and
as I struggled up that dreary steep amid the sulphurous fumes the
memory of that awful night at Montrouge came back to me so vividly
that I almost grew faint.

The mound was one of the tallest in the region of dust, and as I
struggled to the top, panting for breath and with my heart beating
like a sledge-hammer, I saw away to my left the dull red gleam of the
sky, and nearer still the flashing of lights. Thank God! I knew where
I was now and where lay the road to Paris!

For two or three seconds I paused and looked back. My pursuers were
still well behind me, but struggling up resolutely, and in deadly
silence. Beyond, the shanty was a wreck--a mass of timber and moving
forms. I could see it well, for flames were already bursting out; the
rags and straw had evidently caught fire from the lantern. Still
silence there! Not a sound! These old wretches could die game, anyhow.

I had no time for more than a passing glance, for as I cast an eye
round the mound preparatory to making my descent I saw several dark
forms rushing round on either side to cut me off on my way. It was now
a race for life. They were trying to head me on my way to Paris, and
with the instinct of the moment I dashed down to the right-hand side.
I was just in time, for, though I came as it seemed to me down the
steep in a few steps, the wary old men who were watching me turned
back, and one, as I rushed by into the opening between the two mounds
in front, almost struck me a blow with that terrible butcher's axe.
There could surely not be two such weapons about!

Then began a really horrible chase. I easily ran ahead of the old men,
and even when some younger ones and a few women joined in the hunt I
easily distanced them. But I did not know the way, and I could not
even guide myself by the light in the sky, for I was running away from
it. I had heard that, unless of conscious purpose, hunted men turn
always to the left, and so I found it now; and so, I suppose, knew
also my pursuers, who were more animals than men, and with cunning or
instinct had found out such secrets for themselves: for on finishing
a quick spurt, after which I intended to take a moment's breathing
space, I suddenly saw ahead of me two or three forms swiftly passing
behind a mound to the right.

I was in the spider's web now indeed! But with the thought of this new
danger came the resource of the hunted, and so I darted down the next
turning to the right. I continued in this direction for some hundred
yards, and then, making a turn to the left again, felt certain that I
had, at any rate, avoided the danger of being surrounded.

But not of pursuit, for on came the rabble after me, steady, dogged,
relentless, and still in grim silence.

In the greater darkness the mounds seemed now to be somewhat smaller
than before, although--for the night was closing--they looked bigger
in proportion. I was now well ahead of my pursuers, so I made a dart
up the mound in front.

Oh joy of joys! I was close to the edge of this inferno of dustheaps.
Away behind me the red light of Paris was in the sky, and towering up
behind rose the heights of Montmarte--a dim light, with here and there
brilliant points like stars.

Restored to vigour in a moment, I ran over the few remaining mounds of
decreasing size, and found myself on the level land beyond. Even then,
however, the prospect was not inviting. All before me was dark and
dismal, and I had evidently come on one of those dank, low-lying waste
places which are found here and there in the neighbourhood of great
cities. Places of waste and desolation, where the space is required
for the ultimate agglomeration of all that is noxious, and the ground
is so poor as to create no desire of occupancy even in the lowest
squatter. With eyes accustomed to the gloom of the evening, and away
now from the shadows of those dreadful dustheaps, I could see much
more easily than I could a little while ago. It might have been, of
course, that the glare in the sky of the lights of Paris, though the
city was some miles away, was reflected here. Howsoever it was, I saw
well enough to take bearings for certainly some little distance around
me.

In front was a bleak, flat waste that seemed almost dead level, with
here and there the dark shimmering of stagnant pools. Seemingly far
off on the right, amid a small cluster of scattered lights, rose a
dark mass of Fort Montrouge, and away to the left in the dim distance,
pointed with stray gleams from cottage windows, the lights in the sky
showed the locality of Bicêtre. A moment's thought decided me to take
to the right and try to reach Montrouge. There at least would be some
sort of safety, and I might possibly long before come on some of the
cross roads which I knew. Somewhere, not far off, must lie the
strategic road made to connect the outlying chain of forts circling
the city.

Then I looked back. Coming over the mounds, and outlined black against
the glare of the Parisian horizon, I saw several moving figures, and
still a way to the right several more deploying out between me and my
destination. They evidently meant to cut me off in this direction, and
so my choice became constricted; it lay now between going straight
ahead or turning to the left. Stooping to the ground, so as to get the
advantage of the horizon as a line of sight, I looked carefully in
this direction, but could detect no sign of my enemies. I argued that
as they had not guarded or were not trying to guard that point, there
was evidently danger to me there already. So I made up my mind to go
straight on before me.

It was not an inviting prospect, and as I went on the reality grew
worse. The ground became soft and oozy, and now and again gave way
beneath me in a sickening kind of way. I seemed somehow to be going
down, for I saw round me places seemingly more elevated than where I
was, and this in a place which from a little way back seemed dead
level. I looked around, but could see none of my pursuers. This was
strange, for all along these birds of the night had followed me
through the darkness as well as though it was broad daylight. How I
blamed myself for coming out in my light-coloured tourist suit of
tweed. The silence, and my not being able to see my enemies, whilst I
felt that they were watching me, grew appalling, and in the hope of
some one not of this ghastly crew hearing me I raised my voice and
shouted several times. There was not the slightest response; not even
an echo rewarded my efforts. For a while I stood stock still and kept
my eyes in one direction. On one of the rising places around me I saw
something dark move along, then another, and another. This was to my
left, and seemingly moving to head me off.

I thought that again I might with my skill as a runner elude my
enemies at this game, and so with all my speed darted forward.

Splash!

My feet had given way in a mass of slimy rubbish, and I had fallen
headlong into a reeking, stagnant pool. The water and the mud in which
my arms sank up to the elbows was filthy and nauseous beyond
description, and in the suddenness of my fall I had actually swallowed
some of the filthy stuff, which nearly choked me, and made me gasp
for breath. Never shall I forget the moments during which I stood
trying to recover myself almost fainting from the foetid odour of the
filthy pool, whose white mist rose ghostlike around. Worst of all,
with the acute despair of the hunted animal when he sees the pursuing
pack closing on him, I saw before my eyes whilst I stood helpless the
dark forms of my pursuers moving swiftly to surround me.

It is curious how our minds work on odd matters even when the energies
of thought are seemingly concentrated on some terrible and pressing
need. I was in momentary peril of my life: my safety depended on my
action, and my choice of alternatives coming now with almost every
step I took, and yet I could not but think of the strange dogged
persistency of these old men. Their silent resolution, their
steadfast, grim, persistency even in such a cause commanded, as well
as fear, even a measure of respect. What must they have been in the
vigour of their youth. I could understand now that whirlwind rush on
the bridge of Arcola, that scornful exclamation of the Old Guard at
Waterloo! Unconscious cerebration has its own pleasures, even at such
moments; but fortunately it does not in any way clash with the thought
from which action springs.

I realised at a glance that so far I was defeated in my object, my
enemies as yet had won. They had succeeded in surrounding me on three
sides, and were bent on driving me off to the left-hand, where there
was already some danger for me, for they had left no guard. I accepted
the alternative--it was a case of Hobson's choice and run. I had to
keep the lower ground, for my pursuers were on the higher places.
However, though the ooze and broken ground impeded me my youth and
training made me able to hold my ground, and by keeping a diagonal
line I not only kept them from gaining on me but even began to
distance them. This gave me new heart and strength, and by this time
habitual training was beginning to tell and my second wind had come.
Before me the ground rose slightly. I rushed up the slope and found
before me a waste of watery slime, with a low dyke or bank looking
black and grim beyond. I felt that if I could but reach that dyke in
safety I could there, with solid ground under my feet and some kind of
path to guide me, find with comparative ease a way out of my troubles.
After a glance right and left and seeing no one near, I kept my eyes
for a few minutes to their rightful work of aiding my feet whilst I
crossed the swamp. It was rough, hard work, but there was little
danger, merely toil; and a short time took me to the dyke. I rushed up
the slope exulting; but here again I met a new shock. On either side
of me rose a number of crouching figures. From right and left they
rushed at me. Each body held a rope.

The cordon was nearly complete. I could pass on neither side, and the
end was near.

There was only one chance, and I took it. I hurled myself across the
dyke, and escaping out of the very clutches of my foes threw myself
into the stream.

At any other time I should have thought that water foul and filthy,
but now it was as welcome as the most crystal stream to the parched
traveller. It was a highway of safety!

My pursuers rushed after me. Had only one of them held the rope it
would have been all up with me, for he could have entangled me before
I had time to swim a stroke; but the many hands holding it embarrassed
and delayed them, and when the rope struck the water I heard the
splash well behind me. A few minutes' hard swimming took me across
the stream. Refreshed with the immersion and encouraged by the escape,
I climbed the dyke in comparative gaiety of spirits.

From the top I looked back. Through the darkness I saw my assailants
scattering up and down along the dyke. The pursuit was evidently not
ended, and again I had to choose my course. Beyond the dyke where I
stood was a wild, swampy space very similar to that which I had
crossed. I determined to shun such a place, and thought for a moment
whether I would take up or down the dyke. I thought I heard a
sound--the muffled sound of oars, so I listened, and then shouted.

No response; but the sound ceased. My enemies had evidently got a boat
of some kind. As they were on the up side of me I took the down path
and began to run. As I passed to the left of where I had entered the
water I heard several splashes, soft and stealthy, like the sound a
rat makes as he plunges into the stream, but vastly greater; and as I
looked I saw the dark sheen of the water broken by the ripples of
several advancing heads. Some of my enemies were swimming the stream
also.

And now behind me, up the stream, the silence was broken by the quick
rattle and creak of oars; my enemies were in hot pursuit. I put my
best leg foremost and ran on. After a break of a couple of minutes I
looked back, and by a gleam of light through the ragged clouds I saw
several dark forms climbing the bank behind me. The wind had now begun
to rise, and the water beside me was ruffled and beginning to break in
tiny waves on the bank. I had to keep my eyes pretty well on the
ground before me, lest I should stumble, for I knew that to stumble
was death. After a few minutes I looked back behind me. On the dyke
were only a few dark figures, but crossing the waste, swampy ground
were many more. What new danger this portended I did not know--could
only guess. Then as I ran it seemed to me that my track kept ever
sloping away to the right. I looked up ahead and saw that the river
was much wider than before, and that the dyke on which I stood fell
quite away, and beyond it was another stream on whose near bank I saw
some of the dark forms now across the marsh. I was on an island of
some kind.

My situation was now indeed terrible, for my enemies had hemmed me in
on every side. Behind came the quickening roll of the oars, as though
my pursuers knew that the end was close. Around me on every side was
desolation; there was not a roof or light, as far as I could see. Far
off to the right rose some dark mass, but what it was I knew not. For
a moment I paused to think what I should do, not for more, for my
pursuers were drawing closer. Then my mind was made up. I slipped down
the bank and took to the water. I struck out straight ahead so as to
gain the current by clearing the backwater of the island, for such I
presume it was, when I had passed into the stream. I waited till a
cloud came driving across the moon and leaving all in darkness. Then I
took off my hat and laid it softly on the water floating with the
stream, and a second after dived to the right and struck out under
water with all my might. I was, I suppose, half a minute under water,
and when I rose came up as softly as I could, and turning, looked
back. There went my light brown hat floating merrily away. Close
behind it came a rickety old boat, driven furiously by a pair of oars.
The moon was still partly obscured by the drifting clouds, but in the
partial light I could see a man in the bows holding aloft ready to
strike what appeared to me to be that same dreadful pole-axe which I
had before escaped. As I looked the boat drew closer, closer, and the
man struck savagely. The hat disappeared. The man fell forward, almost
out of the boat. His comrades dragged him in but without the axe, and
then as I turned with all my energies bent on reaching the further
bank, I heard the fierce whirr of the muttered 'Sacre!' which marked
the anger of my baffled pursuers.

That was the first sound I had heard from human lips during all this
dreadful chase, and full as it was of menace and danger to me it was a
welcome sound for it broke that awful silence which shrouded and
appalled me. It was as though an overt sign that my opponents were men
and not ghosts, and that with them I had, at least, the chance of a
man, though but one against many.

But now that the spell of silence was broken the sounds came thick and
fast. From boat to shore and back from shore to boat came quick
question and answer, all in the fiercest whispers. I looked back--a
fatal thing to do--for in the instant someone caught sight of my face,
which showed white on the dark water, and shouted. Hands pointed to
me, and in a moment or two the boat was under weigh, and following
hard after me. I had but a little way to go, but quicker and quicker
came the boat after me. A few more strokes and I would be on the
shore, but I felt the oncoming of the boat, and expected each second
to feel the crash of an oar or other weapon on my head. Had I not seen
that dreadful axe disappear in the water I do not think that I could
have won the shore. I heard the muttered curses of those not rowing
and the laboured breath of the rowers. With one supreme effort for
life or liberty I touched the bank and sprang up it. There was not a
single second to spare, for hard behind me the boat grounded and
several dark forms sprang after me. I gained the top of the dyke, and
keeping to the left ran on again. The boat put off and followed down
the stream. Seeing this I feared danger in this direction, and quickly
turning, ran down the dyke on the other side, and after passing a
short stretch of marshy ground gained a wild, open flat country and
sped on.

Still behind me came on my relentless pursuers. Far away, below me, I
saw the same dark mass as before, but now grown closer and greater. My
heart gave a great thrill of delight, for I knew that it must be the
fortress of Bicêtre, and with new courage I ran on. I had heard that
between each and all of the protecting forts of Paris there are
strategic ways, deep sunk roads where soldiers marching should be
sheltered from an enemy. I knew that if I could gain this road I would
be safe, but in the darkness I could not see any sign of it, so, in
blind hope of striking it, I ran on.

Presently I came to the edge of a deep cut, and found that down below
me ran a road guarded on each side by a ditch of water fenced on
either side by a straight, high wall.

Getting fainter and dizzier, I ran on; the ground got more
broken--more and more still, till I staggered and fell, and rose
again, and ran on in the blind anguish of the hunted. Again the
thought of Alice nerved me. I would not be lost and wreck her life: I
would fight and struggle for life to the bitter end. With a great
effort I caught the top of the wall. As, scrambling like a catamount,
I drew myself up, I actually felt a hand touch the sole of my foot. I
was now on a sort of causeway, and before me I saw a dim light. Blind
and dizzy, I ran on, staggered, and fell, rising, covered with dust
and blood.

'Halt la!'

The words sounded like a voice from heaven. A blaze of light seemed to
enwrap me, and I shouted with joy.

'Qui va la?' The rattle of musketry, the flash of steel before my
eyes. Instinctively I stopped, though close behind me came a rush of
my pursuers.

Another word or two, and out from a gateway poured, as it seemed to
me, a tide of red and blue, as the guard turned out. All around seemed
blazing with light, and the flash of steel, the clink and rattle of
arms, and the loud, harsh voices of command. As I fell forward,
utterly exhausted, a soldier caught me. I looked back in dreadful
expectation, and saw the mass of dark forms disappearing into the
night. Then I must have fainted. When I recovered my senses I was in
the guard room. They gave me brandy, and after a while I was able to
tell them something of what had passed. Then a commissary of police
appeared, apparently out of the empty air, as is the way of the
Parisian police officer. He listened attentively, and then had a
moment's consultation with the officer in command. Apparently they
were agreed, for they asked me if I were ready now to come with them.

'Where to?' I asked, rising to go.

'Back to the dust heaps. We shall, perhaps, catch them yet!'

'I shall try!' said I.

He eyed me for a moment keenly, and said suddenly:

'Would you like to wait a while or till tomorrow, young Englishman?'
This touched me to the quick, as, perhaps, he intended, and I jumped
to my feet.

'Come now!' I said; 'now! now! An Englishman is always ready for his
duty!'

The commissary was a good fellow, as well as a shrewd one; he slapped
my shoulder kindly. 'Brave garçon!' he said. 'Forgive me, but I knew
what would do you most good. The guard is ready. Come!'

And so, passing right through the guard room, and through a long
vaulted passage, we were out into the night. A few of the men in front
had powerful lanterns. Through courtyards and down a sloping way we
passed out through a low archway to a sunken road, the same that I had
seen in my flight. The order was given to get at the double, and with
a quick, springing stride, half run, half walk, the soldiers went
swiftly along. I felt my strength renewed again--such is the
difference between hunter and hunted. A very short distance took us to
a low-lying pontoon bridge across the stream, and evidently very
little higher up than I had struck it. Some effort had evidently been
made to damage it, for the ropes had all been cut, and one of the
chains had been broken. I heard the officer say to the commissary:

'We are just in time! A few more minutes, and they would have
destroyed the bridge. Forward, quicker still!' and on we went. Again
we reached a pontoon on the winding stream; as we came up we heard the
hollow boom of the metal drums as the efforts to destroy the bridge
was again renewed. A word of command was given, and several men raised
their rifles.

'Fire!' A volley rang out. There was a muffled cry, and the dark forms
dispersed. But the evil was done, and we saw the far end of the
pontoon swing into the stream. This was a serious delay, and it was
nearly an hour before we had renewed ropes and restored the bridge
sufficiently to allow us to cross.

We renewed the chase. Quicker, quicker we went towards the dust
heaps.

After a time we came to a place that I knew. There were the remains of
a fire--a few smouldering wood ashes still cast a red glow, but the
bulk of the ashes were cold. I knew the site of the hut and the hill
behind it up which I had rushed, and in the flickering glow the eyes
of the rats still shone with a sort of phosphorescence. The commissary
spoke a word to the officer, and he cried:

'Halt!'

The soldiers were ordered to spread around and watch, and then we
commenced to examine the ruins. The commissary himself began to lift
away the charred boards and rubbish. These the soldiers took and piled
together. Presently he started back, then bent down and rising
beckoned me.

'See!' he said.

It was a gruesome sight. There lay a skeleton face downwards, a woman
by the lines--an old woman by the coarse fibre of the bone. Between
the ribs rose a long spike-like dagger made from a butcher's
sharpening knife, its keen point buried in the spine.

'You will observe,' said the commissary to the officer and to me as he
took out his note book, 'that the woman must have fallen on her
dagger. The rats are many here--see their eyes glistening among that
heap of bones--and you will also notice'--I shuddered as he placed his
hand on the skeleton--'that but little time was lost by them, for the
bones are scarcely cold!'

There was no other sign of any one near, living or dead; and so
deploying again into line the soldiers passed on. Presently we came to
the hut made of the old wardrobe. We approached. In five of the six
compartments was an old man sleeping--sleeping so soundly that even
the glare of the lanterns did not wake them. Old and grim and grizzled
they looked, with their gaunt, wrinkled, bronzed faces and their white
moustaches.

The officer called out harshly and loudly a word of command, and in an
instant each one of them was on his feet before us and standing at
'attention!'

'What do you here?'

'We sleep,' was the answer.

'Where are the other chiffoniers?' asked the commissary.

'Gone to work.'

'And you?'

'We are on guard!'

'Peste!' laughed the officer grimly, as he looked at the old men one
after the other in the face and added with cool deliberate cruelty:
'Asleep on duty! Is this the manner of the Old Guard? No wonder, then,
a Waterloo!'

By the gleam of the lantern I saw the grim old faces grow deadly pale,
and almost shuddered at the look in the eyes of the old men as the
laugh of the soldiers echoed the grim pleasantry of the officer.

I felt in that moment that I was in some measure avenged.

For a moment they looked as if they would throw themselves on the
taunter, but years of their life had schooled them and they remained
still.

'You are but five,' said the commissary; 'where is the sixth?' The
answer came with a grim chuckle.

'He is there!' and the speaker pointed to the bottom of the wardrobe.
'He died last night. You won't find much of him. The burial of the
rats is quick!'

The commissary stooped and looked in. Then he turned to the officer
and said calmly:

'We may as well go back. No trace here now; nothing to prove that man
was the one wounded by your soldiers' bullets! Probably they murdered
him to cover up the trace. See!' again he stooped and placed his hands
on the skeleton. 'The rats work quickly and they are many. These bones
are warm!'

I shuddered, and so did many more of those around me.

'Form!' said the officer, and so in marching order, with the lanterns
swinging in front and the manacled veterans in the midst, with steady
tramp we took ourselves out of the dustheaps and turned backward to
the fortress of Bicêtre.

       *       *       *       *       *

My year of probation has long since ended, and Alice is my wife. But
when I look back upon that trying twelvemonth one of the most vivid
incidents that memory recalls is that associated with my visit to the
City of Dust.




A Dream of Red Hands


The first opinion given to me regarding Jacob Settle was a simple
descriptive statement, 'He's a down-in-the-mouth chap': but I found
that it embodied the thoughts and ideas of all his fellow-workmen.
There was in the phrase a certain easy tolerance, an absence of
positive feeling of any kind, rather than any complete opinion, which
marked pretty accurately the man's place in public esteem. Still,
there was some dissimilarity between this and his appearance which
unconsciously set me thinking, and by degrees, as I saw more of the
place and the workmen, I came to have a special interest in him. He
was, I found, for ever doing kindnesses, not involving money expenses
beyond his humble means, but in the manifold ways of forethought and
forbearance and self-repression which are of the truer charities of
life. Women and children trusted him implicitly, though, strangely
enough, he rather shunned them, except when anyone was sick, and then
he made his appearance to help if he could, timidly and awkwardly. He
led a very solitary life, keeping house by himself in a tiny cottage,
or rather hut, of one room, far on the edge of the moorland. His
existence seemed so sad and solitary that I wished to cheer it up, and
for the purpose took the occasion when we had both been sitting up
with a child, injured by me through accident, to offer to lend him
books. He gladly accepted, and as we parted in the grey of the dawn I
felt that something of mutual confidence had been established between
us.

The books were always most carefully and punctually returned, and in
time Jacob Settle and I became quite friends. Once or twice as I
crossed the moorland on Sundays I looked in on him; but on such
occasions he was shy and ill at ease so that I felt diffident about
calling to see him. He would never under any circumstances come into
my own lodgings.

One Sunday afternoon, I was coming back from a long walk beyond the
moor, and as I passed Settle's cottage stopped at the door to say 'How
do you do?' to him. As the door was shut, I thought that he was out,
and merely knocked for form's sake, or through habit, not expecting to
get any answer. To my surprise, I heard a feeble voice from within,
though what was said I could not hear. I entered at once, and found
Jacob lying half-dressed upon his bed. He was as pale as death, and
the sweat was simply rolling off his face. His hands were
unconsciously gripping the bedclothes as a drowning man holds on to
whatever he may grasp. As I came in he half arose, with a wild, hunted
look in his eyes, which were wide open and staring, as though
something of horror had come before him; but when he recognised me he
sank back on the couch with a smothered sob of relief and closed his
eyes. I stood by him for a while, quite a minute or two, while he
gasped. Then he opened his eyes and looked at me, but with such a
despairing, woeful expression that, as I am a living man, I would have
rather seen that frozen look of horror. I sat down beside him and
asked after his health. For a while he would not answer me except to
say that he was not ill; but then, after scrutinising me closely, he
half arose on his elbow and said:

'I thank you kindly, sir, but I'm simply telling you the truth. I am
not ill, as men call it, though God knows whether there be not worse
sicknesses than doctors know of. I'll tell you, as you are so kind,
but I trust that you won't even mention such a thing to a living soul,
for it might work me more and greater woe. I am suffering from a bad
dream.'

'A bad dream!' I said, hoping to cheer him; 'but dreams pass away with
the light--even with waking.' There I stopped, for before he spoke I
saw the answer in his desolate look round the little place.

'No! no! that's all well for people that live in comfort and with
those they love around them. It is a thousand times worse for those
who live alone and have to do so. What cheer is there for me, waking
here in the silence of the night, with the wide moor around me full of
voices and full of faces that make my waking a worse dream than my
sleep? Ah, young sir, you have no past that can send its legions to
people the darkness and the empty space, and I pray the good God that
you may never have!' As he spoke, there was such an almost
irresistible gravity of conviction in his manner that I abandoned my
remonstrance about his solitary life. I felt that I was in the
presence of some secret influence which I could not fathom. To my
relief, for I knew not what to say, he went on:

'Two nights past have I dreamed it. It was hard enough the first
night, but I came through it. Last night the expectation was in itself
almost worse than the dream--until the dream came, and then it swept
away every remembrance of lesser pain. I stayed awake till just
before the dawn, and then it came again, and ever since I have been in
such an agony as I am sure the dying feel, and with it all the dread
of tonight.' Before he had got to the end of the sentence my mind was
made up, and I felt that I could speak to him more cheerfully.

'Try and get to sleep early tonight--in fact, before the evening has
passed away. The sleep will refresh you, and I promise you there will
not be any bad dreams after tonight.' He shook his head hopelessly, so
I sat a little longer and then left him.

When I got home I made my arrangements for the night, for I had made
up my mind to share Jacob Settle's lonely vigil in his cottage on the
moor. I judged that if he got to sleep before sunset he would wake
well before midnight, and so, just as the bells of the city were
striking eleven, I stood opposite his door armed with a bag, in which
were my supper, an extra large flask, a couple of candles, and a book.
The moonlight was bright, and flooded the whole moor, till it was
almost as light as day; but ever and anon black clouds drove across
the sky, and made a darkness which by comparison seemed almost
tangible. I opened the door softly, and entered without waking Jacob,
who lay asleep with his white face upward. He was still, and again
bathed in sweat. I tried to imagine what visions were passing before
those closed eyes which could bring with them the misery and woe which
were stamped on the face, but fancy failed me, and I waited for the
awakening. It came suddenly, and in a fashion which touched me to the
quick, for the hollow groan that broke from the man's white lips as he
half arose and sank back was manifestly the realisation or completion
of some train of thought which had gone before.

'If this be dreaming,' said I to myself, 'then it must be based on
some very terrible reality. What can have been that unhappy fact that
he spoke of?'

While I thus spoke, he realised that I was with him. It struck me as
strange that he had no period of that doubt as to whether dream or
reality surrounded him which commonly marks an expected environment of
waking men. With a positive cry of joy, he seized my hand and held it
in his two wet, trembling hands, as a frightened child clings on to
someone whom it loves. I tried to soothe him:

'There, there! it is all right. I have come to stay with you tonight,
and together we will try to fight this evil dream.' He let go my hand
suddenly, and sank back on his bed and covered his eyes with his
hands.

'Fight it?--the evil dream! Ah! no, sir, no! No mortal power can fight
that dream, for it comes from God--and is burned in here;' and he beat
upon his forehead. Then he went on:

'It is the same dream, ever the same, and yet it grows in its power to
torture me every time it comes.'

'What is the dream?' I asked, thinking that the speaking of it might
give him some relief, but he shrank away from me, and after a long
pause said:

'No, I had better not tell it. It may not come again.'

There was manifestly something to conceal from me--something that lay
behind the dream, so I answered:

'All right. I hope you have seen the last of it. But if it should come
again, you will tell me, will you not? I ask, not out of curiosity,
but because I think it may relieve you to speak.' He answered with
what I thought was almost an undue amount of solemnity:

'If it comes again, I shall tell you all.'

Then I tried to get his mind away from the subject to more mundane
things, so I produced supper, and made him share it with me, including
the contents of the flask. After a little he braced up, and when I lit
my cigar, having given him another, we smoked a full hour, and talked
of many things. Little by little the comfort of his body stole over
his mind, and I could see sleep laying her gentle hands on his
eyelids. He felt it, too, and told me that now he felt all right, and
I might safely leave him; but I told him that, right or wrong, I was
going to see in the daylight. So I lit my other candle, and began to
read as he fell asleep.

By degrees I got interested in my book, so interested that presently I
was startled by its dropping out of my hands. I looked and saw that
Jacob was still asleep, and I was rejoiced to see that there was on
his face a look of unwonted happiness, while his lips seemed to move
with unspoken words. Then I turned to my work again, and again woke,
but this time to feel chilled to my very marrow by hearing the voice
from the bed beside me:

'Not with those red hands! Never! never!' On looking at him, I found
that he was still asleep. He woke, however, in an instant, and did not
seem surprised to see me; there was again that strange apathy as to
his surroundings. Then I said:

'Settle, tell me your dream. You may speak freely, for I shall hold
your confidence sacred. While we both live I shall never mention what
you may choose to tell me.'

He replied:

'I said I would; but I had better tell you first what goes before the
dream, that you may understand. I was a schoolmaster when I was a very
young man; it was only a parish school in a little village in the
West Country. No need to mention any names. Better not. I was engaged
to be married to a young girl whom I loved and almost reverenced. It
was the old story. While we were waiting for the time when we could
afford to set up house together, another man came along. He was nearly
as young as I was, and handsome, and a gentleman, with all a
gentleman's attractive ways for a woman of our class. He would go
fishing, and she would meet him while I was at my work in school. I
reasoned with her and implored her to give him up. I offered to get
married at once and go away and begin the world in a strange country;
but she would not listen to anything I could say, and I could see that
she was infatuated with him. Then I took it on myself to meet the man
and ask him to deal well with the girl, for I thought he might mean
honestly by her, so that there might be no talk or chance of talk on
the part of others. I went where I should meet him with none by, and
we met!' Here Jacob Settle had to pause, for something seemed to rise
in his throat, and he almost gasped for breath. Then he went on:

'Sir, as God is above us, there was no selfish thought in my heart
that day, I loved my pretty Mabel too well to be content with a part
of her love, and I had thought of my own unhappiness too often not to
have come to realise that, whatever might come to her, my hope was
gone. He was insolent to me--you, sir, who are a gentleman, cannot
know, perhaps, how galling can be the insolence of one who is above
you in station--but I bore with that. I implored him to deal well with
the girl, for what might be only a pastime of an idle hour with him
might be the breaking of her heart. For I never had a thought of her
truth, or that the worst of harm could come to her--it was only the
unhappiness to her heart I feared. But when I asked him when he
intended to marry her his laughter galled me so that I lost my temper
and told him that I would not stand by and see her life made unhappy.
Then he grew angry too, and in his anger said such cruel things of her
that then and there I swore he should not live to do her harm. God
knows how it came about, for in such moments of passion it is hard to
remember the steps from a word to a blow, but I found myself standing
over his dead body, with my hands crimson with the blood that welled
from his torn throat. We were alone and he was a stranger, with none
of his kin to seek for him and murder does not always out--not all at
once. His bones may be whitening still, for all I know, in the pool of
the river where I left him. No one suspected his absence, or why it
was, except my poor Mabel, and she dared not speak. But it was all in
vain, for when I came back again after an absence of months--for I
could not live in the place--I learned that her shame had come and
that she had died in it. Hitherto I had been borne up by the thought
that my ill deed had saved her future, but now, when I learned that I
had been too late, and that my poor love was smirched with that man's
sin, I fled away with the sense of my useless guilt upon me more
heavily than I could bear. Ah! sir, you that have not done such a sin
don't know what it is to carry it with you. You may think that custom
makes it easy to you, but it is not so. It grows and grows with every
hour, till it becomes intolerable, and with it growing, too, the
feeling that you must for ever stand outside Heaven. You don't know
what that means, and I pray God that you never may. Ordinary men, to
whom all things are possible, don't often, if ever, think of Heaven.
It is a name, and nothing more, and they are content to wait and let
things be, but to those who are doomed to be shut out for ever you
cannot think what it means, you cannot guess or measure the terrible
endless longing to see the gates opened, and to be able to join the
white figures within.

'And this brings me to my dream. It seemed that the portal was before
me, with great gates of massive steel with bars of the thickness of a
mast, rising to the very clouds, and so close that between them was
just a glimpse of a crystal grotto, on whose shining walls were
figured many white-clad forms with faces radiant with joy. When I
stood before the gate my heart and my soul were so full of rapture and
longing that I forgot. And there stood at the gate two mighty angels
with sweeping wings, and, oh! so stern of countenance. They held each
in one hand a flaming sword, and in the other the latchet, which moved
to and fro at their lightest touch. Nearer were figures all draped in
black, with heads covered so that only the eyes were seen, and they
handed to each who came white garments such as the angels wear. A low
murmur came that told that all should put on their own robes, and
without soil, or the angels would not pass them in, but would smite
them down with the flaming swords. I was eager to don my own garment,
and hurriedly threw it over me and stepped swiftly to the gate; but it
moved not, and the angels, loosing the latchet, pointed to my dress, I
looked down, and was aghast, for the whole robe was smeared with
blood. My hands were red; they glittered with the blood that dripped
from them as on that day by the river bank. And then the angels raised
their flaming swords to smite me down, and the horror was complete--I
awoke. Again, and again, and again, that awful dream comes to me. I
never learn from the experience, I never remember, but at the
beginning the hope is ever there to make the end more appalling; and I
know that the dream does not come out of the common darkness where the
dreams abide, but that it is sent from God as a punishment! Never,
never shall I be able to pass the gate, for the soil on the angel
garments must ever come from these bloody hands!'

I listened as in a spell as Jacob Settle spoke. There was something so
far away in the tone of his voice--something so dreamy and mystic in
the eyes that looked as if through me at some spirit beyond--something
so lofty in his very diction and in such marked contrast to his
workworn clothes and his poor surroundings that I wondered if the
whole thing were not a dream.

We were both silent for a long time. I kept looking at the man before
me in growing wonderment. Now that his confession had been made, his
soul, which had been crushed to the very earth, seemed to leap back
again to uprightness with some resilient force. I suppose I ought to
have been horrified with his story, but, strange to say, I was not. It
certainly is not pleasant to be made the recipient of the confidence
of a murderer, but this poor fellow seemed to have had, not only so
much provocation, but so much self-denying purpose in his deed of
blood that I did not feel called upon to pass judgment upon him. My
purpose was to comfort, so I spoke out with what calmness I could, for
my heart was beating fast and heavily:

'You need not despair, Jacob Settle. God is very good, and His mercy
is great. Live on and work on in the hope that some day you may feel
that you have atoned for the past.' Here I paused, for I could see
that deep, natural sleep this time, was creeping upon him. 'Go to
sleep,' I said; 'I shall watch with you here and we shall have no more
evil dreams tonight.'

He made an effort to pull himself together, and answered:

'I don't know how to thank you for your goodness to me this night, but
I think you had best leave me now. I'll try and sleep this out; I feel
a weight off my mind since I have told you all. If there's anything of
the man left in me, I must try and fight out life alone.'

'I'll go tonight, as you wish it,' I said; 'but take my advice, and do
not live in such a solitary way. Go among men and women; live among
them. Share their joys and sorrows, and it will help you to forget.
This solitude will make you melancholy mad.'

'I will!' he answered, half unconsciously, for sleep was overmastering
him.

I turned to go, and he looked after me. When I had touched the latch I
dropped it, and, coming back to the bed, held out my hand. He grasped
it with both his as he rose to a sitting posture, and I said my
goodnight, trying to cheer him:

'Heart, man, heart! There is work in the world for you to do, Jacob
Settle. You can wear those white robes yet and pass through that gate
of steel!'

Then I left him.

A week after I found his cottage deserted, and on asking at the works
was told that he had 'gone north', no one exactly knew whither.

Two years afterwards, I was staying for a few days with my friend Dr.
Munro in Glasgow. He was a busy man, and could not spare much time for
going about with me, so I spent my days in excursions to the Trossachs
and Loch Katrine and down the Clyde. On the second last evening of my
stay I came back somewhat later than I had arranged, but found that
my host was late too. The maid told me that he had been sent for to
the hospital--a case of accident at the gas-works, and the dinner was
postponed an hour; so telling her I would stroll down to find her
master and walk back with him, I went out. At the hospital I found him
washing his hands preparatory to starting for home. Casually, I asked
him what his case was.

'Oh, the usual thing! A rotten rope and men's lives of no account. Two
men were working in a gasometer, when the rope that held their
scaffolding broke. It must have occurred just before the dinner hour,
for no one noticed their absence till the men had returned. There was
about seven feet of water in the gasometer, so they had a hard fight
for it, poor fellows. However, one of them was alive, just alive, but
we have had a hard job to pull him through. It seems that he owes his
life to his mate, for I have never heard of greater heroism. They swam
together while their strength lasted, but at the end they were so done
up that even the lights above, and the men slung with ropes, coming
down to help them, could not keep them up. But one of them stood on
the bottom and held up his comrade over his head, and those few
breaths made all the difference between life and death. They were a
shocking sight when they were taken out, for that water is like a
purple dye with the gas and the tar. The man upstairs looked as if he
had been washed in blood. Ugh!'

'And the other?'

'Oh, he's worse still. But he must have been a very noble fellow. That
struggle under the water must have been fearful; one can see that by
the way the blood has been drawn from the extremities. It makes the
idea of the _Stigmata_ possible to look at him. Resolution like this
could, you would think, do anything in the world. Ay! it might almost
unbar the gates of Heaven. Look here, old man, it is not a very
pleasant sight, especially just before dinner, but you are a writer,
and this is an odd case. Here is something you would not like to miss,
for in all human probability you will never see anything like it
again.' While he was speaking he had brought me into the mortuary of
the hospital.

On the bier lay a body covered with a white sheet, which was wrapped
close round it.

'Looks like a chrysalis, don't it? I say, Jack, if there be anything
in the old myth that a soul is typified by a butterfly, well, then the
one that this chrysalis sent forth was a very noble specimen and took
all the sunlight on its wings. See here!' He uncovered the face.
Horrible, indeed, it looked, as though stained with blood. But I knew
him at once, Jacob Settle! My friend pulled the winding sheet further
down.

The hands were crossed on the purple breast as they had been
reverently placed by some tender-hearted person. As I saw them my
heart throbbed with a great exultation, for the memory of his
harrowing dream rushed across my mind. There was no stain now on those
poor, brave hands, for they were blanched white as snow.

And somehow as I looked I felt that the evil dream was all over. That
noble soul had won a way through the gate at last. The white robe had
now no stain from the hands that had put it on.




Crooken Sands


Mr Arthur Fernlee Markam, who took what was known as the Red House
above the Mains of Crooken, was a London merchant, and being
essentially a cockney, thought it necessary when he went for the
summer holidays to Scotland to provide an entire rig-out as a Highland
chieftain, as manifested in chromolithographs and on the music-hall
stage. He had once seen in the Empire the Great Prince--'The Bounder
King'--bring down the house by appearing as 'The MacSlogan of that
Ilk,' and singing the celebrated Scotch song, 'There's naething like
haggis to mak a mon dry!' and he had ever since preserved in his mind
a faithful image of the picturesque and warlike appearance which he
presented. Indeed, if the true inwardness of Mr. Markam's mind on the
subject of his selection of Aberdeenshire as a summer resort were
known, it would be found that in the foreground of the holiday
locality which his fancy painted stalked the many hued figure of the
MacSlogan of that Ilk. However, be this as it may, a very kind
fortune--certainly so far as external beauty was concerned--led him to
the choice of Crooken Bay. It is a lovely spot, between Aberdeen and
Peterhead, just under the rock-bound headland whence the long,
dangerous reefs known as The Spurs run out into the North Sea.
Between this and the 'Mains of Crooken'--a village sheltered by the
northern cliffs--lies the deep bay, backed with a multitude of
bent-grown dunes where the rabbits are to be found in thousands. Thus
at either end of the bay is a rocky promontory, and when the dawn or
the sunset falls on the rocks of red syenite the effect is very
lovely. The bay itself is floored with level sand and the tide runs
far out, leaving a smooth waste of hard sand on which are dotted here
and there the stake nets and bag nets of the salmon fishers. At one
end of the bay there is a little group or cluster of rocks whose heads
are raised something above high water, except when in rough weather
the waves come over them green. At low tide they are exposed down to
sand level; and here is perhaps the only little bit of dangerous sand
on this part of the eastern coast. Between the rocks, which are apart
about some fifty feet, is a small quicksand, which, like the Goodwins,
is dangerous only with the incoming tide. It extends outwards till it
is lost in the sea, and inwards till it fades away in the hard sand of
the upper beach. On the slope of the hill which rises beyond the
dunes, midway between the Spurs and the Port of Crooken, is the Red
House. It rises from the midst of a clump of fir-trees which protect
it on three sides, leaving the whole sea front open. A trim
old-fashioned garden stretches down to the roadway, on crossing which
a grassy path, which can be used for light vehicles, threads a way to
the shore, winding amongst the sand hills.

When the Markam family arrived at the Red House after their thirty-six
hours of pitching on the Aberdeen steamer _Ban Righ_ from Blackwall,
with the subsequent train to Yellon and drive of a dozen miles, they
all agreed that they had never seen a more delightful spot. The
general satisfaction was more marked as at that very time none of the
family were, for several reasons, inclined to find favourable anything
or any place over the Scottish border. Though the family was a large
one, the prosperity of the business allowed them all sorts of personal
luxuries, amongst which was a wide latitude in the way of dress. The
frequency of the Markam girls' new frocks was a source of envy to
their bosom friends and of joy to themselves.

Arthur Fernlee Markam had not taken his family into his confidence
regarding his new costume. He was not quite certain that he should be
free from ridicule, or at least from sarcasm, and as he was sensitive
on the subject, he thought it better to be actually in the suitable
environment before he allowed the full splendour to burst upon them.
He had taken some pains, to insure the completeness of the Highland
costume. For the purpose he had paid many visits to 'The Scotch
All-Wool Tartan Clothing Mart' which had been lately established in
Copthall-court by the Messrs. MacCallum More and Roderick MacDhu. He
had anxious consultations with the head of the firm--MacCallum as he
called himself, resenting any such additions as 'Mr.' or 'Esquire.'
The known stock of buckles, buttons, straps, brooches and ornaments of
all kinds were examined in critical detail; and at last an eagle's
feather of sufficiently magnificent proportions was discovered, and
the equipment was complete. It was only when he saw the finished
costume, with the vivid hues of the tartan seemingly modified into
comparative sobriety by the multitude of silver fittings, the
cairngorm brooches, the philibeg, dirk and sporran that he was fully
and absolutely satisfied with his choice. At first he had thought of
the Royal Stuart dress tartan, but abandoned it on the MacCallum
pointing out that if he should happen to be in the neighbourhood of
Balmoral it might lead to complications. The MacCallum, who, by the
way, spoke with a remarkable cockney accent, suggested other plaids in
turn; but now that the other question of accuracy had been raised, Mr.
Markam foresaw difficulties if he should by chance find himself in the
locality of the clan whose colours he had usurped. The MacCallum at
last undertook to have, at Markam's expense, a special pattern woven
which would not be exactly the same as any existing tartan, though
partaking of the characteristics of many. It was based on the Royal
Stuart, but contained suggestions as to simplicity of pattern from the
Macalister and Ogilvie clans, and as to neutrality of colour from the
clans of Buchanan, Macbeth, Chief of Macintosh and Macleod. When the
specimen had been shown to Markam he had feared somewhat lest it
should strike the eye of his domestic circle as gaudy; but as Roderick
MacDhu fell into perfect ecstasies over its beauty he did not make any
objection to the completion of the piece. He thought, and wisely, that
if a genuine Scotchman like MacDhu liked it, it must be
right--especially as the junior partner was a man very much of his own
build and appearance. When the MacCallum was receiving his
cheque--which, by the way, was a pretty stiff one--he remarked:

'I've taken the liberty of having some more of the stuff woven in case
you or any of your friends should want it.' Markam was gratified, and
told him that he should be only too happy if the beautiful stuff which
they had originated between them should become a favourite, as he had
no doubt it would in time. He might make and sell as much as he would.

Markam tried the dress on in his office one evening after the clerks
had all gone home. He was pleased, though a little frightened, at the
result. The MacCallum had done his work thoroughly, and there was
nothing omitted that could add to the martial dignity of the wearer.

'I shall not, of course, take the claymore and the pistols with me on
ordinary occasions,' said Markam to himself as he began to undress. He
determined that he would wear the dress for the first time on landing
in Scotland, and accordingly on the morning when the _Ban Righ_ was
hanging off the Girdle Ness lighthouse, waiting for the tide to enter
the port of Aberdeen, he emerged from his cabin in all the gaudy
splendour of his new costume. The first comment he heard was from one
of his own sons, who did not recognise him at first.

'Here's a guy! Great Scott! It's the governor!' And the boy fled
forthwith and tried to bury his laughter under a cushion in the
saloon. Markam was a good sailor and had not suffered from the
pitching of the boat, so that his naturally rubicund face was even
more rosy by the conscious blush which suffused his cheeks when he had
found himself at once the cynosure of all eyes. He could have wished
that he had not been so bold for he knew from the cold that there was
a big bare spot under one side of his jauntily worn Glengarry cap.
However, he faced the group of strangers boldly. He was not,
outwardly, upset even when some of the comments reached his ears.

'He's off his bloomin' chump,' said a cockney in a suit of exaggerated
plaid.

'There's flies on him,' said a tall thin Yankee, pale with
sea-sickness, who was on his way to take up his residence for a time
as close as he could get to the gates of Balmoral.

'Happy thought! Let us fill our mulls; now's the chance!' said a
young Oxford man on his way home to Inverness. But presently Mr.
Markam heard the voice of his eldest daughter.

'Where is he? Where is he?' and she came tearing along the deck with
her hat blowing behind her. Her face showed signs of agitation, for
her mother had just been telling her of her father's condition; but
when she saw him she instantly burst into laughter so violent that it
ended in a fit of hysterics. Something of the same kind happened to
each of the other children. When they had all had their turn Mr.
Markam went to his cabin and sent his wife's maid to tell each member
of the family that he wanted to see them at once. They all made their
appearance, suppressing their feelings as well as they could. He said
to them very quietly:

'My dears, don't I provide you all with ample allowances?'

'Yes, father!' they all answered gravely, 'no one could be more
generous!'

'Don't I let you dress as you please?'

'Yes, father!'--this a little sheepishly.

'Then, my dears, don't you think it would be nicer and kinder of you
not to try and make me feel uncomfortable, even if I do assume a dress
which is ridiculous in your eyes, though quite common enough in the
country where we are about to sojourn?' There was no answer except
that which appeared in their hanging heads. He was a good father and
they all knew it. He was quite satisfied and went on:

'There, now, run away and enjoy yourselves! We shan't have another
word about it.' Then he went on deck again and stood bravely the fire
of ridicule which he recognised around him, though nothing more was
said within his hearing.

The astonishment and the amusement which his get-up occasioned on the
_Ban Righ_ was, however, nothing to that which it created in Aberdeen.
The boys and loafers, and women with babies, who waited at the landing
shed, followed _en masse_ as the Markam party took their way to the
railway station; even the porters with their old-fashioned knots and
their new-fashioned barrows, who await the traveller at the foot of
the gang-plank, followed in wondering delight. Fortunately the
Peterhead train was just about to start, so that the martyrdom was not
unnecessarily prolonged. In the carriage the glorious Highland costume
was unseen, and as there were but few persons at the station at
Yellon, all went well there. When, however, the carriage drew near the
Mains of Crooken and the fisher folk had run to their doors to see who
it was that was passing, the excitement exceeded all bounds. The
children with one impulse waved their bonnets and ran shouting behind
the carriage; the men forsook their nets and their baiting and
followed; the women clutched their babies, and followed also. The
horses were tired after their long journey to Yellon and back, and the
hill was steep, so that there was ample time for the crowd to gather
and even to pass on ahead.

Mrs. Markam and the elder girls would have liked to make some protest
or to do something to relieve their feelings of chagrin at the
ridicule which they saw on all faces, but there was a look of fixed
determination on the face of the seeming Highlander which awed them a
little, and they were silent. It might have been that the eagle's
feather, even when arising above the bald head, the cairngorm brooch
even on the fat shoulder, and the claymore, dirk and pistols, even
when belted round the extensive paunch and protruding from the
stocking on the sturdy calf, fulfilled their existence as symbols of
martial and terrifying import! When the party arrived at the gate of
the Red House there awaited them a crowd of Crooken inhabitants,
hatless and respectfully silent; the remainder of the population was
painfully toiling up the hill. The silence was broken by only one
sound, that of a man with a deep voice.

'Man! but he's forgotten the pipes!'

The servants had arrived some days before, and all things were in
readiness. In the glow consequent on a good lunch after a hard journey
all the disagreeables of travel and all the chagrin consequent on the
adoption of the obnoxious costume were forgotten.

That afternoon Markam, still clad in full array, walked through the
Mains of Crooken. He was all alone, for, strange to say, his wife and
both daughters had sick headaches, and were, as he was told, lying
down to rest after the fatigue of the journey. His eldest son, who
claimed to be a young man, had gone out by himself to explore the
surroundings of the place, and one of the boys could not be found. The
other boy, on being told that his father had sent for him to come for
a walk, had managed--by accident, of course--to fall into the water
butt, and had to be dried and rigged out afresh. His clothes not
having been as yet unpacked this was of course impossible without
delay.

Mr. Markam was not quite satisfied with his walk. He could not meet
any of his neighbours. It was not that there were not enough people
about, for every house and cottage seemed to be full; but the people
when in the open were either in their doorways some distance behind
him, or on the roadway a long distance in front. As he passed he
could see the tops of heads and the whites of eyes in the windows or
round the corners of doors. The only interview which he had was
anything but a pleasant one. This was with an odd sort of old man who
was hardly ever heard to speak except to join in the 'Amens' in the
meeting-house. His sole occupation seemed to be to wait at the window
of the post-office from eight o'clock in the morning till the arrival
of the mail at one, when he carried the letter-bag to a neighbouring
baronial castle. The remainder of his day was spent on a seat in a
draughty part of the port, where the offal of the fish, the refuse of
the bait, and the house rubbish was thrown, and where the ducks were
accustomed to hold high revel.

When Saft Tammie beheld him coming he raised his eyes, which were
generally fixed on the nothing which lay on the roadway opposite his
seat, and, seeming dazzled as if by a burst of sunshine, rubbed them
and shaded them with his hand. Then he started up and raised his hand
aloft in a denunciatory manner as he spoke:--

'"Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher. All is vanity." Mon, be
warned in time! "Behold the lilies of the field, they toil not,
neither do they spin, yet Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like one of these." Mon! Mon! Thy vanity is as the quicksand which
swallows up all which comes within its spell. Beware vanity! Beware
the quicksand, which yawneth for thee, and which will swallow thee up!
See thyself! Learn thine own vanity! Meet thyself face to face, and
then in that moment thou shalt learn the fatal force of thy vanity.
Learn it, know it, and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee!' Then
without another word he went back to his seat and sat there immovable
and expressionless as before.

Markam could not but feel a little upset by this tirade. Only that it
was spoken by a seeming madman, he would have put it down to some
eccentric exhibition of Scottish humour or impudence; but the gravity
of the message--for it seemed nothing else--made such a reading
impossible. He was, however, determined not to give in to ridicule,
and although he had not yet seen anything in Scotland to remind him
even of a kilt, he determined to wear his Highland dress. When he
returned home, in less than half-an-hour, he found that every member
of the family was, despite the headaches, out taking a walk. He took
the opportunity afforded by their absence of locking himself in his
dressing-room, took off the Highland dress, and, putting on a suit of
flannels, lit a cigar and had a snooze. He was awakened by the noise
of the family coming in, and at once donning his dress made his
appearance in the drawing-room for tea.

He did not go out again that afternoon; but after dinner he put on his
dress again--he had, of course dressed for dinner as usual--and went
by himself for a walk on the sea-shore. He had by this time come to
the conclusion that he would get by degrees accustomed to the Highland
dress before making it his ordinary wear. The moon was up and he
easily followed the path through the sand-hills, and shortly struck
the shore. The tide was out and the beach firm as a rock, so he
strolled southwards to nearly the end of the bay. Here he was
attracted by two isolated rocks some little way out from the edge of
the dunes, so he strolled towards them. When he reached the nearest
one he climbed it, and, sitting there elevated some fifteen or twenty
feet over the waste of sand, enjoyed the lovely, peaceful prospect.
The moon was rising behind the headland of Pennyfold, and its light
was just touching the top of the furthermost rock of the Spurs some
three-quarters of a mile out; the rest of the rocks were in dark
shadow. As the moon rose over the headland, the rocks of the Spurs and
then the beach by degrees became flooded with light.

For a good while Mr. Markam sat and looked at the rising moon and the
growing area of light which followed its rise. Then he turned and
faced eastwards and sat with his chin in his hand looking seawards,
and revelling in the peace and beauty and freedom of the scene. The
roar of London--the darkness and the strife and weariness of London
life--seemed to have passed quite away, and he lived at the moment a
freer and higher life. He looked at the glistening water as it stole
its way over the flat waste of sand, coming closer and closer
insensibly--the tide had turned. Presently he heard a distant shouting
along the beach very far off.

'The fishermen calling to each other,' he said to himself and looked
around. As he did so he got a horrible shock, for though just then a
cloud sailed across the moon he saw, in spite of the sudden darkness
around him, his own image. For an instant, on the top of the opposite
rock he could see the bald back of the head and the Glengarry cap with
the immense eagle's feather. As he staggered back his foot slipped,
and he began to slide down towards the sand between the two rocks. He
took no concern as to falling, for the sand was really only a few feet
below him, and his mind was occupied with the figure or simulacrum of
himself, which had already disappeared. As the easiest way of reaching
_terra firma_ he prepared to jump the remainder of the distance. All
this had taken but a second, but the brain works quickly, and even as
he gathered himself for the spring he saw the sand below him lying so
marbly level shake and shiver in an odd way. A sudden fear overcame
him; his knees failed, and instead of jumping he slid miserably down
the rock, scratching his bare legs as he went. His feet touched the
sand--went through it like water--and he was down below his knees
before he realised that he was in a quicksand. Wildly he grasped at
the rock to keep himself from sinking further, and fortunately there
was a jutting spur or edge which he was able to grasp instinctively.
To this he clung in grim desperation. He tried to shout, but his
breath would not come, till after a great effort his voice rang out.
Again he shouted, and it seemed as if the sound of his own voice gave
him new courage, for he was able to hold on to the rock for a longer
time than he thought possible--though he held on only in blind
desperation. He was, however, beginning to find his grasp weakening,
when, joy of joys! his shout was answered by a rough voice from just
above him.

'God be thankit, I'm nae too late!' and a fisherman with great
thigh-boots came hurriedly climbing over the rock. In an instant he
recognised the gravity of the danger, and with a cheering 'Haud fast,
mon! I'm comin'!' scrambled down till he found a firm foothold. Then
with one strong hand holding the rock above, he leaned down, and
catching Markam's wrist, called out to him, 'Haud to me, mon! Haud to
me wi' ither hond!'

Then he lent his great strength, and with a steady, sturdy pull,
dragged him out of the hungry quicksand and placed him safe upon the
rock. Hardly giving him time to draw breath, he pulled and pushed
him--never letting him go for an instant--over the rock into the firm
sand beyond it, and finally deposited him, still shaking from the
magnitude of his danger, high upon the beach. Then he began to speak:

'Mon! but I was just in time. If I had no laucht at yon foolish lads
and begun to rin at the first you'd a bin sinkin' doon to the bowels
o' the airth be the noo! Wully Beagrie thocht you was a ghaist, and
Tom MacPhail swore ye was only like a goblin on a puddick-steel! "Na!"
said I. "Yon's but the daft Englishman--the loony that had escapit
frae the waxwarks." I was thinkin' that bein' strange and silly--if
not a whole-made feel--ye'd no ken the ways o' the quicksan'! I
shouted till warn ye, and then ran to drag ye aff, if need be. But God
be thankit, be ye fule or only half-daft wi' yer vanity, that I was no
that late!' and he reverently lifted his cap as he spoke.

Mr. Markam was deeply touched and thankful for his escape from a
horrible death; but the sting of the charge of vanity thus made once
more against him came through his humility. He was about to reply
angrily, when suddenly a great awe fell upon him as he remembered the
warning words of the half-crazy letter-carrier: 'Meet thyself face to
face, and repent ere the quicksand shall swallow thee!'

Here, too, he remembered the image of himself that he had seen and the
sudden danger from the deadly quicksand that had followed. He was
silent a full minute, and then said:

'My good fellow, I owe you my life!'

The answer came with reverence from the hardy fisherman, 'Na! Na! Ye
owe that to God; but, as for me, I'm only too glad till be the humble
instrument o' His mercy.'

'But you will let me thank you,' said Mr. Markam, taking both the
great hands of his deliverer in his and holding them tight. 'My heart
is too full as yet, and my nerves are too much shaken to let me say
much; but, believe me, I am very, very grateful!' It was quite evident
that the poor old fellow was deeply touched, for the tears were
running down his cheeks.

The fisherman said, with a rough but true courtesy:

'Ay, sir! thank me and ye will--if it'll do yer poor heart good. An'
I'm thinking that if it were me I'd be thankful too. But, sir, as for
me I need no thanks. I am glad, so I am!'

That Arthur Fernlee Markam was really thankful and grateful was shown
practically later on. Within a week's time there sailed into Port
Crooken the finest fishing smack that had ever been seen in the
harbour of Peterhead. She was fully found with sails and gear of all
kinds, and with nets of the best. Her master and men went away by the
coach, after having left with the salmon-fisher's wife the papers
which made her over to him.

As Mr. Markam and the salmon-fisher walked together along the shore
the former asked his companion not to mention the fact that he had
been in such imminent danger, for that it would only distress his dear
wife and children. He said that he would warn them all of the
quicksand, and for that purpose he, then and there, asked questions
about it till he felt that his information on the subject was
complete. Before they parted he asked his companion if he had happened
to see a second figure, dressed like himself on the other rock as he
had approached to succour him.

'Na! Na!' came the answer, 'there is nae sic another fule in these
parts. Nor has there been since the time o' Jamie Fleeman--him that
was fule to the Laird o' Udny. Why, mon! sic a heathenish dress as ye
have on till ye has nae been seen in these pairts within the memory o'
mon. An' I'm thinkin' that sic a dress never was for sittin' on the
cauld rock, as ye done beyont. Mon! but do ye no fear the rheumatism
or the lumbagy wi' floppin' doon on to the cauld stanes wi' yer bare
flesh? I was thinking that it was daft ye waur when I see ye the
mornin' doon be the port, but it's fule or eediot ye maun be for the
like o' thot!' Mr. Markam did not care to argue the point, and as they
were now close to his own home he asked the salmon-fisher to have a
glass of whisky--which he did--and they parted for the night. He took
good care to warn all his family of the quicksand, telling them that
he had himself been in some danger from it.

All that night he never slept. He heard the hours strike one after the
other; but try how he would he could not get to sleep. Over and over
again he went through the horrible episode of the quicksand, from the
time that Saft Tammie had broken his habitual silence to preach to him
of the sin of vanity and to warn him. The question kept ever arising
in his mind: 'Am I then so vain as to be in the ranks of the foolish?'
and the answer ever came in the words of the crazy prophet: '"Vanity
of vanities! All is vanity." Meet thyself face to face, and repent ere
the quicksand shall swallow thee!' Somehow a feeling of doom began to
shape itself in his mind that he would yet perish in that same
quicksand, for there he had already met himself face to face.

In the grey of the morning he dozed off, but it was evident that he
continued the subject in his dreams, for he was fully awakened by his
wife, who said:

'Do sleep quietly! That blessed Highland suit has got on your brain.
Don't talk in your sleep, if you can help it!' He was somehow
conscious of a glad feeling, as if some terrible weight had been
lifted from him, but he did not know any cause of it. He asked his
wife what he had said in his sleep, and she answered:

'You said it often enough, goodness knows, for one to remember
it--"Not face to face! I saw the eagle plume over the bald head! There
is hope yet! Not face to face!" Go to sleep! Do!' And then he did go
to sleep, for he seemed to realise that the prophecy of the crazy man
had not yet been fulfilled. He had not met himself face to face--as
yet at all events.

He was awakened early by a maid who came to tell him that there was a
fisherman at the door who wanted to see him. He dressed himself as
quickly as he could--for he was not yet expert with the Highland
dress--and hurried down, not wishing to keep the salmon-fisher
waiting. He was surprised and not altogether pleased to find that his
visitor was none other than Saft Tammie, who at once opened fire on
him:

'I maun gang awa' t' the post; but I thocht that I would waste an hour
on ye, and ca' roond just to see if ye waur still that fou wi' vanity
as on the nicht gane by. An I see that ye've no learned the lesson.
Well! the time is comin', sure eneucht! However I have all the time i'
the marnins to my ain sel', so I'll aye look roond jist till see how
ye gang yer ain gait to the quicksan', and then to the de'il! I'm aff
till ma wark the noo!' And he went straightway, leaving Mr. Markam
considerably vexed, for the maids within earshot were vainly trying to
conceal their giggles. He had fairly made up his mind to wear on that
day ordinary clothes, but the visit of Saft Tammie reversed his
decision. He would show them all that he was not a coward, and he
would go on as he had begun--come what might. When he came to
breakfast in full martial panoply the children, one and all, held down
their heads and the backs of their necks became very red indeed. As,
however, none of them laughed--except Titus, the youngest boy, who was
seized with a fit of hysterical choking and was promptly banished from
the room--he could not reprove them, but began to break his egg with a
sternly determined air. It was unfortunate that as his wife was
handing him a cup of tea one of the buttons of his sleeve caught in
the lace of her morning wrapper, with the result that the hot tea was
spilt over his bare knees. Not unnaturally, he made use of a swear
word, whereupon his wife, somewhat nettled, spoke out:

'Well, Arthur, if you will make such an idiot of yourself with that
ridiculous costume what else can you expect? You are not accustomed to
it--and you never will be!' In answer he began an indignant speech
with: 'Madam!' but he got no further, for now that the subject was
broached, Mrs. Markam intended to have her say out. It was not a
pleasant say, and, truth to tell, it was not said in a pleasant
manner. A wife's manner seldom is pleasant when she undertakes to tell
what she considers 'truths' to her husband. The result was that Arthur
Fernlee Markam undertook, then and there, that during his stay in
Scotland he would wear no other costume than the one she abused.
Woman-like his wife had the last word--given in this case with tears:

'Very well, Arthur! Of course you will do as you choose. Make me as
ridiculous as you can, and spoil the poor girls' chances in life.
Young men don't seem to care, as a general rule, for an idiot
father-in-law! But I must warn you that your vanity will some day get
a rude shock--if indeed you are not before then in an asylum or dead!'

It was manifest after a few days that Mr. Markam would have to take
the major part of his outdoor exercise by himself. The girls now and
again took a walk with him, chiefly in the early morning or late at
night, or on a wet day when there would be no one about; they
professed to be willing to go out at all times, but somehow something
always seemed to occur to prevent it. The boys could never be found at
all on such occasions, and as to Mrs. Markam she sternly refused to go
out with him on any consideration so long as he should continue to
make a fool of himself. On the Sunday he dressed himself in his
habitual broadcloth, for he rightly felt that church was not a place
for angry feelings; but on Monday morning he resumed his Highland
garb. By this time he would have given a good deal if he had never
thought of the dress, but his British obstinacy was strong, and he
would not give in. Saft Tammie called at his house every morning, and,
not being able to see him nor to have any message taken to him, used
to call back in the afternoon when the letter-bag had been delivered
and watched for his going out. On such occasions he never failed to
warn him against his vanity in the same words which he had used at the
first. Before many days were over Mr. Markam had come to look upon him
as little short of a scourge.

By the time the week was out the enforced partial solitude, the
constant chagrin, and the never-ending brooding which was thus
engendered, began to make Mr. Markam quite ill. He was too proud to
take any of his family into his confidence since they had in his view
treated him very badly. Then he did not sleep well at night, and when
he did sleep he had constantly bad dreams. Merely to assure himself
that his pluck was not failing him he made it a practice to visit the
quicksand at least once every day; he hardly ever failed to go there
the last thing at night. It was perhaps this habit that wrought the
quicksand with its terrible experience so perpetually into his dreams.
More and more vivid these became, till on waking at times he could
hardly realise that he had not been actually in the flesh to visit the
fatal spot. He sometimes thought that he might have been walking in
his sleep.

One night his dream was so vivid that when he awoke he could not
believe that it had only been a dream. He shut his eyes again and
again, but each time the vision, if it was a vision, or the reality,
if it was a reality, would rise before him. The moon was shining full
and yellow over the quicksand as he approached it; he could see the
expanse of light shaken and disturbed and full of black shadows as the
liquid sand quivered and trembled and wrinkled and eddied as was its
wont between its pauses of marble calm. As he drew close to it another
figure came towards it from the opposite side with equal footsteps. He
saw that it was his own figure, his very self, and in silent terror,
compelled by what force he knew not, he advanced--charmed as the bird
is by the snake, mesmerised or hypnotised--to meet this other self. As
he felt the yielding sand closing over him he awoke in the agony of
death, trembling with fear, and, strange to say, with the silly man's
prophecy seeming to sound in his ears: '"Vanity of vanities! All is
vanity!" See thyself and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee!'

So convinced was he that this was no dream that he arose, early as it
was, and dressing himself without disturbing his wife took his way to
the shore. His heart fell when he came across a series of footsteps on
the sands, which he at once recognised as his own. There was the same
wide heel, the same square toe; he had no doubt now that he had
actually been there, and half horrified, and half in a state of dreamy
stupor, he followed the footsteps, and found them lost in the edge of
the yielding quicksand. This gave him a terrible shock, for there were
no return steps marked on the sand, and he felt that there was some
dread mystery which he could not penetrate, and the penetration of
which would, he feared, undo him.

In this state of affairs he took two wrong courses. Firstly he kept
his trouble to himself, and, as none of his family had any clue to it,
every innocent word or expression which they used supplied fuel to the
consuming fire of his imagination. Secondly he began to read books
professing to bear upon the mysteries of dreaming and of mental
phenomena generally, with the result that every wild imagination of
every crank or half-crazy philosopher became a living germ of unrest
in the fertilising soil of his disordered brain. Thus negatively and
positively all things began to work to a common end. Not the least of
his disturbing causes was Saft Tammie, who had now become at certain
times of the day a fixture at his gate. After a while, being
interested in the previous state of this individual, he made inquiries
regarding his past with the following result.

Saft Tammie was popularly believed to be the son of a laird in one of
the counties round the Firth of Forth. He had been partially educated
for the ministry, but for some cause which no one ever knew threw up
his prospects suddenly, and, going to Peterhead in its days of whaling
prosperity, had there taken service on a whaler. Here off and on he
had remained for some years, getting gradually more and more silent in
his habits, till finally his shipmates protested against so taciturn a
mate, and he had found service amongst the fishing smacks of the
northern fleet. He had worked for many years at the fishing with
always the reputation of being 'a wee bit daft,' till at length he had
gradually settled down at Crooken, where the laird, doubtless knowing
something of his family history, had given him a job which practically
made him a pensioner. The minister who gave the information finished
thus:--

'It is a very strange thing, but the man seems to have some odd kind
of gift. Whether it be that "second sight" which we Scotch people are
so prone to believe in, or some other occult form of knowledge, I know
not, but nothing of a disastrous tendency ever occurs in this place
but the men with whom he lives are able to quote after the event some
saying of his which certainly appears to have foretold it. He gets
uneasy or excited--wakes up, in fact--when death is in the air!'

This did not in any way tend to lessen Mr. Markam's concern, but on
the contrary seemed to impress the prophecy more deeply on his mind.
Of all the books which he had read on his new subject of study none
interested him so much as a German one _Die Döppleganger_, by Dr.
Heinrich von Aschenberg, formerly of Bonn. Here he learned for the
first time of cases where men had led a double existence--each nature
being quite apart from the other--the body being always a reality with
one spirit, and a simulacrum with the other. Needless to say that Mr.
Markam realised this theory as exactly suiting his own case. The
glimpse which he had of his own back the night of his escape from the
quicksand--his own footmarks disappearing into the quicksand with no
return steps visible--the prophecy of Saft Tammie about his meeting
himself and perishing in the quicksand--all lent aid to the conviction
that he was in his own person an instance of the döppleganger. Being
then conscious of a double life he took steps to prove its existence
to his own satisfaction. To this end on one night before going to bed
he wrote his name in chalk on the soles of his shoes. That night he
dreamed of the quicksand, and of his visiting it--dreamed so vividly
that on walking in the grey of the dawn he could not believe that he
had not been there. Arising, without disturbing his wife, he sought
his shoes.

The chalk signatures were undisturbed! He dressed himself and stole
out softly. This time the tide was in, so he crossed the dunes and
struck the shore on the further side of the quicksand. There, oh,
horror of horrors! he saw his own footprints dying into the abyss!

He went home a desperately sad man. It seemed incredible that he, an
elderly commercial man, who had passed a long and uneventful life in
the pursuit of business in the midst of roaring, practical London,
should thus find himself enmeshed in mystery and horror, and that he
should discover that he had two existences. He could not speak of his
trouble even to his own wife, for well he knew that she would at once
require the fullest particulars of that other life--the one which she
did not know; and that she would at the start not only imagine but
charge him with all manner of infidelities on the head of it. And so
his brooding grew deeper and deeper still. One evening--the tide then
going out and the moon being at the full--he was sitting waiting for
dinner when the maid announced that Saft Tammie was making a
disturbance outside because he would not be let in to see him. He was
very indignant, but did not like the maid to think that he had any
fear on the subject, and so told her to bring him in. Tammie entered,
walking more briskly than ever with his head up and a look of vigorous
decision in the eyes that were so generally cast down. As soon as he
entered he said:

'I have come to see ye once again--once again; and there ye sit, still
just like a cockatoo on a pairch. Weel, mon, I forgie ye! Mind ye
that, I forgie ye!' And without a word more he turned and walked out
of the house, leaving the master in speechless indignation.

After dinner he determined to pay another visit to the quicksand--he
would not allow even to himself that he was afraid to go. And so,
about nine o'clock, in full array, he marched to the beach, and
passing over the sands sat on the skirt of the nearer rock. The full
moon was behind him and its light lit up the bay so that its fringe of
foam, the dark outline of the headland, and the stakes of the
salmon-nets were all emphasised. In the brilliant yellow glow the
lights in the windows of Port Crooken and in those of the distant
castle of the laird trembled like stars through the sky. For a long
time he sat and drank in the beauty of the scene, and his soul seemed
to feel a peace that it had not known for many days. All the pettiness
and annoyance and silly fears of the past weeks seemed blotted out,
and a new holy calm took the vacant place. In this sweet and solemn
mood he reviewed his late action calmly, and felt ashamed of himself
for his vanity and for the obstinacy which had followed it. And then
and there he made up his mind that the present would be the last time
he would wear the costume which had estranged him from those whom he
loved, and which had caused him so many hours and days of chagrin,
vexation, and pain.

But almost as soon as he arrived at this conclusion another voice
seemed to speak within him and mockingly to ask him if he should ever
get the chance to wear the suit again--that it was too late--he had
chosen his course and must now abide the issue.

'It is not too late,' came the quick answer of his better self; and
full of the thought, he rose up to go home and divest himself of the
now hateful costume right away. He paused for one look at the
beautiful scene. The light lay pale and mellow, softening every
outline of rock and tree and house-top, and deepening the shadows into
velvety-black, and lighting, as with a pale flame, the incoming tide,
that now crept fringe-like across the flat waste of sand. Then he left
the rock and stepped out for the shore.

But as he did so a frightful spasm of horror shook him, and for an
instant the blood rushing to his head shut out all the light of the
full moon. Once more he saw that fatal image of himself moving beyond
the quicksand from the opposite rock to the shore. The shock was all
the greater for the contrast with the spell of peace which he had just
enjoyed; and, almost paralysed in every sense, he stood and watched
the fatal vision and the wrinkly, crawling quicksand that seemed to
writhe and yearn for something that lay between. There could be no
mistake this time, for though the moon behind threw the face into
shadow he could see there the same shaven cheeks as his own, and the
small stubby moustache of a few weeks' growth. The light shone on the
brilliant tartan, and on the eagle's plume. Even the bald space at one
side of the Glengarry cap glistened, as did the cairngorm brooch on
the shoulder and the tops of the silver buttons. As he looked he felt
his feet slightly sinking, for he was still near the edge of the belt
of quicksand, and he stepped back. As he did so the other figure
stepped forward, so that the space between them was preserved.

So the two stood facing each other, as though in some weird
fascination; and in the rushing of the blood through his brain Markam
seemed to hear the words of the prophecy: 'See thyself face to face,
and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee.' He did stand face to face
with himself, he had repented--and now he was sinking in the
quicksand! The warning and prophecy were coming true.

Above him the seagulls screamed, circling round the fringe of the
incoming tide, and the sound being entirely mortal recalled him to
himself. On the instant he stepped back a few quick steps, for as yet
only his feet were merged in the soft sand. As he did so the other
figure stepped forward, and coming within the deadly grip of the
quicksand began to sink. It seemed to Markam that he was looking at
himself going down to his doom, and on the instant the anguish of his
soul found vent in a terrible cry. There was at the same instant a
terrible cry from the other figure, and as Markam threw up his hands
the figure did the same. With horror-struck eyes he saw him sink
deeper into the quicksand; and then, impelled by what power he knew
not, he advanced again towards the sand to meet his fate. But as his
more forward foot began to sink he heard again the cries of the
seagulls which seemed to restore his benumbed faculties. With a mighty
effort he drew his foot out of the sand which seemed to clutch it,
leaving his shoe behind, and then in sheer terror he turned and ran
from the place, never stopping till his breath and strength failed
him, and he sank half swooning on the grassy path through the
sandhills.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arthur Markam made up his mind not to tell his family of his terrible
adventure--until at least such time as he should be complete master of
himself. Now that the fatal double--his other self--had been engulfed
in the quicksand he felt something like his old peace of mind.

That night he slept soundly and did not dream at all; and in the
morning was quite his old self. It really seemed as though his newer
and worser self had disappeared for ever; and strangely enough Saft
Tammie was absent from his post that morning and never appeared there
again, but sat in his old place watching nothing, as of old, with
lack-lustre eye. In accordance with his resolution he did not wear his
Highland suit again, but one evening tied it up in a bundle, claymore,
dirk and philibeg and all, and bringing it secretly with him threw it
into the quicksand. With a feeling of intense pleasure he saw it
sucked below the sand, which closed above it into marble smoothness.
Then he went home and announced cheerily to his family assembled for
evening prayers:

'Well! my dears, you will be glad to hear that I have abandoned my
idea of wearing the Highland dress. I see now what a vain old fool I
was and how ridiculous I made myself! You shall never see it again!'

'Where is it, father?' asked one of the girls, wishing to say
something so that such a self-sacrificing announcement as her father's
should not be passed in absolute silence. His answer was so sweetly
given that the girl rose from her seat and came and kissed him. It
was:

'In the quicksand, my dear! and I hope that my worser self is buried
there along with it--for ever.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The remainder of the summer was passed at Crooken with delight by all
the family, and on his return to town Mr. Markam had almost forgotten
the whole of the incident of the quicksand, and all touching on it,
when one day he got a letter from the MacCallum More which caused him
much thought, though he said nothing of it to his family, and left it,
for certain reasons, unanswered. It ran as follows:--

      'The MacCallum More and Roderick MacDhu.
        'The Scotch All-Wool Tartan Clothing Mart.
          Copthall Court, E.C.,
            30th September, 1892.

'Dear Sir,--I trust you will pardon the liberty which I take in
writing to you, but I am desirous of making an inquiry, and I am
informed that you have been sojourning during the summer in
Aberdeenshire (Scotland, N.B.). My partner, Mr. Roderick MacDhu--as he
appears for business reasons on our bill-heads and in our
advertisements, his real name being Emmanuel Moses Marks of
London--went early last month to Scotland (N.B.) for a tour, but as I
have only once heard from him, shortly after his departure, I am
anxious lest any misfortune may have befallen him. As I have been
unable to obtain any news of him on making all inquiries in my power,
I venture to appeal to you. His letter was written in deep dejection
of spirit, and mentioned that he feared a judgment had come upon him
for wishing to appear as a Scotchman on Scottish soil, as he had one
moonlight night shortly after his arrival seen his 'wraith'. He
evidently alluded to the fact that before his departure he had
procured for himself a Highland costume similar to that which we had
the honour to supply to you, with which, as perhaps you will remember,
he was much struck. He may, however, never have worn it, as he was, to
my own knowledge, diffident about putting it on, and even went so far
as to tell me that he would at first only venture to wear it late at
night or very early in the morning, and then only in remote places,
until such time as he should get accustomed to it. Unfortunately he
did not advise me of his route so that I am in complete ignorance of
his whereabouts; and I venture to ask if you may have seen or heard of
a Highland costume similar to your own having been seen anywhere in
the neighbourhood in which I am told you have recently purchased the
estate which you temporarily occupied. I shall not expect an answer to
this letter unless you can give me some information regarding my
friend and partner, so pray do not trouble to reply unless there be
cause. I am encouraged to think that he may have been in your
neighbourhood as, though his letter is not dated, the envelope is
marked with the postmark of "Yellon" which I find is in Aberdeenshire,
and not far from the Mains of Crooken.

  'I have the honour to be, dear sir,
      'Yours very respectfully,
          'JOSHUA SHEENY COHEN BENJAMIN
            '(The MacCallum More.)'



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DRACULA'S GUEST***


******* This file should be named 10150-8.txt or 10150-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/1/5/10150



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gatherings From Spain, by Richard Ford

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Gatherings From Spain

Author: Richard Ford

Release Date: December 12, 2012 [EBook #41611]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GATHERINGS FROM SPAIN ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)





Every attempt has been made to replicate the original book as printed.
Some typographical errors have been corrected (a list follows the text).
No attempt has been made to correct or normalize the printed
accentuation or spelling of Spanish names or words. (etext transcriber’s
note)




GATHERINGS FROM SPAIN.

BY THE

AUTHOR OF THE HANDBOOK OF SPAIN;

CHIEFLY SELECTED FROM THAT WORK, WITH
MUCH NEW MATTER.

_NEW EDITION._

LONDON:
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

1851.


TO THE

HONOURABLE MRS. FORD,

These pages, which she has been so good as to peruse and approve of, are
dedicated, in the hopes that other fair readers may follow her example,

By her very affectionate
Husband and Servant,
RICHARD FORD.




PREFACE.


Many ladies, some of whom even contemplate a visit to Spain, having
condescended to signify to the publisher their regrets, that the
Handbook was printed in a form, which rendered its perusal irksome, and
also to express a wish that the type had been larger, the Author, to
whom this distinguished compliment was communicated, has hastened to
submit to their indulgence a few extracts and selections, which may
throw some light on the character of a country and people, always of the
highest interest, and particularly so at this moment, when their
independence is once more threatened by a crafty and aggressive
neighbour.

In preparing these compilations for the press much new matter has been
added, to supply the place of portions omitted; for, in order to lighten
the narrative, the Author has removed much lumber of learning, and has
not scrupled occasionally to throw Strabo, and even Saint Isidore
himself, overboard. Progress is the order of the day in Spain, and its
advance is the more rapid, as she was so much in arrear of other
nations. Transition is the present condition of the country, where
yesterday is effaced by to-morrow. There the relentless march of
European intellect is crushing many a native wild flower, which, having
no value save colour and sweetness, must be rooted up before
cotton-mills are constructed and bread stuffs substituted; many a trait
of nationality in manners and costume is already effaced; monks are
gone, and mantillas are going, alas! going.

In the changes that have recently taken place, many descriptions of ways
and things now presented to the public will soon become almost matters
of history and antiquarian interest. The passages here reprinted will be
omitted in the forthcoming new edition of the Handbook, to which these
pages may form a companion; but their chief object has been to offer a
few hours’ amusement, and may be of instruction, to those who remain at
home; and should the humble attempt meet with the approbation of fair
readers, the author will bear, with more than Spanish resignation,
whatever animadversions bearded critics may be pleased to inflict on
this or on the other side of the water.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

.....PAGE

A General View of Spain--Isolation--King of the Spains--Castilian
Precedence--Localism--Want of Union--Admiration of Spain--M. Thiers in
Spain.....1


CHAPTER II.

The Geography of Spain--Zones--Mountains--The Pyrenees--The Gabacho, and
French Politics.....7


CHAPTER III.

The Rivers of Spain--Bridges--Navigation--The Ebro and Tagus.....23


CHAPTER IV.

Divisions into Provinces--Ancient Demarcations--Modern
Departments--Population--Revenue--Spanish Stocks.....30


CHAPTER V.

Travelling in Spain--Steamers--Roads, Roman, Monastic, and Royal--Modern
Railways--English Speculations.....40


CHAPTER VI.

Post Office in Spain--Travelling with Post Horses--Riding post--Mails
and Diligences, Galeras, Coches de Colleras, Drivers and Manner of
Driving, and Oaths.....53


CHAPTER VII.

Spanish Horses--Mules--Asses--Muleteers--Maragatos.....65


CHAPTER VIII.

Riding Tour in Spain--Pleasures of it--Pedestrian Tour--Choice of
Companions--Rules for a Riding Tour--Season of Year--Day’s
Journey--Management of Horse; his Feet; Shoes; General Hints.....80


CHAPTER IX.

The Rider’s Costume--Alforjas: Their contents--The Bota, and How to use
it--Pig Skins and Borracha--Spanish Money--Onzas and smaller
Coins.....94


CHAPTER X.

Spanish Servants: their Character--Travelling Groom, Cook, and
Valet.....105


CHAPTER XI.

A Spanish Cook--Philosophy of Spanish Cuisine--Sauce--Difficulty of
Commissariat--The Provend--Spanish Hares and Rabbits--The
Olla--Garbanzos--Spanish Pigs--Bacon and Hams--Omelette--Salad and
Gazpacho.....119


CHAPTER XII.

Drinks of Spain--Water--Irrigation--Fountains--Spanish Thirstiness--The
Alcarraza--Water Carriers--Ablutions--Spanish Chocolate--Agraz--Beer
Lemonade.....136


CHAPTER XIII.

Spanish Wines--Spanish Indifference--Wine-making--Vins du Pays--Local
Wines--Benicarló--Valdepeñas.....145


CHAPTER XIV.

Sherry Wines--The Sherry District--Origin of the Name--Varieties of
Soil--Of Grapes--Pajarete--Rojas Clemente--Cultivation of Vines--Best
Vineyards--The Vintage--Amontillado--The Capataz--The Bodega--Sherry
Wine--Arrope and Madre Vino--A Lecture on Sherry in the Cellar--at the
Table--Price of Fine Sherry--Falsification of Sherry--Manzanilla--The
Alpistera.....150

CHAPTER XV.

Spanish Inns: Why so Indifferent--The Fonda--Modern Improvements--The
Posada--Spanish Innkeepers--The Venta: Arrival in
it--Arrangement--Garlic--Dinner--Evening--Night--Bill--Identity with the
Inns of the Ancients.....165


CHAPTER XVI.

Spanish Robbers--A Robber Adventure--Guardias Civiles--Exaggerated
Accounts--Cross of the Murdered--Idle Robber Tales--French
Bandittiphobia--Robber History--Guerrilleros--Smugglers--Jose
Maria--Robbers of the First Class--The Ratero--Miguelites--Escorts and
Escopeteros--Passes, Protections, and Talismans--Execution of a
Robber.....186


CHAPTER XVII.

The Spanish Doctor: His Social Position--Medical
Abuses--Hospitals--Medical Education--Lunatic Asylums--Foundling
Hospital of Seville--Medical Pretensions--Dissection--Family
Physician--Consultations--Medical
Costume--Prescriptions--Druggists--Snake Broth--Salve for
Knife-cuts.....213


CHAPTER XVIII.

Spanish Spiritual Remedies for the Body--Miraculous Relics--Sanative
Oils--Philosophy of Relic Remedies--Midwifery and the Cinta of
Tortosa--Bull of Crusade.....236


CHAPTER XIX.

The Spanish Figaro--Mustachios--Whiskers--Beards--Bleeding--Heraldic
Blood--Blue, Red, and Black Blood--Figaro’s Shop--The Baratero--Shaving
and Toothdrawing.....255


CHAPTER XX.

What to observe in Spain--How to observe--Spanish Incuriousness and
Suspicions--French Spies and Plunderers--Sketching in
Spain--Difficulties; How Surmounted--Efficacy of Passports and
Bribes--Uncertainty and Want of Information in the Natives.....265

CHAPTER XXI.

Origin of Bull-fight or Festival, and its Religious Character--Fiestas
Reales--Royal Feasts--Charles I. at one--Discontinuance of the Old
System--Sham Bull-fights--Plaza de Toros--Slang Language--Spanish
Bulls--Breeds--The Going to a Bull-fight.....286


CHAPTER XXII.

The Bull-fight--Opening of Spectacle--First Act, and Appearance of the
Bull--The Picador--Bull Bastinado--The Horses, and their Cruel
Treatment--Fire and Dogs--The Second Act--The Chulos and their
Darts--The Third Act--The Matador--Death of the Bull--The Conclusion,
and Philosophy of the Amusement--Its Effect on Ladies.....300


CHAPTER XXIII.

Spanish Theatre; Old and Modern Drama; Arrangement of Play-houses--The
Henroost--The Fandango; National Dances--A Gipsy Ball--Italian
Opera--National Songs and Guitars.....318


CHAPTER XXIV.

Manufacture of Cigars--Tobacco--Smuggling _viâ_ Gibraltar--Cigars of
Ferdinand VII.--Making a Cigarrito--Zumalacarreguy and the
Schoolmaster--Time and Money wasted in Smoking--Postscript on Spanish
Stock.....335




GATHERINGS FROM SPAIN.




CHAPTER I.

     A general view of Spain--Isolation--King of the Spains--Castilian
     precedence--Localism--Want of Union--Admiration of Spain--M. Thiers
     in Spain.


[Sidenote: KING OF THE SPAINS.]

[Sidenote: LOCALISM OF SPANIARDS.]

The kingdom of Spain, which looks so compact on the map, is composed of
many distinct provinces, each of which in earlier times formed a
separate and independent kingdom; and although all are now united under
one crown by marriage, inheritance, conquest, and other circumstances,
the original distinctions, geographical as well as social, remain almost
unaltered. The language, costume, habits, and local character of the
natives, vary no less than the climate and productions of the soil. The
chains of mountains which intersect the whole peninsula, and the deep
rivers which separate portions of it, have, for many years, operated as
so many walls and moats, by cutting off intercommunication, and by
fostering that tendency to isolation which must exist in all hilly
countries, where good roads and bridges do not abound. As similar
circumstances led the people of ancient Greece to split into small
principalities, tribes and clans, so in Spain, man, following the
example of the nature by which he is surrounded, has little in common
with the inhabitant of the adjoining district; and these differences are
increased and perpetuated by the ancient jealousies and inveterate
dislikes, which petty and contiguous states keep up with such tenacious
memory. The general comprehensive term “Spain,” which is convenient for
geographers and politicians, is calculated to mislead the traveller, for
it would be far from easy to predicate any single thing of Spain or
Spaniards which will be equally applicable to all its heterogeneous
component parts. The north-western provinces are more rainy than
Devonshire, while the centre plains are more calcined than those of the
deserts of Arabia, and the littoral south or eastern coasts altogether
Algerian. The rude agricultural Gallician, the industrious manufacturing
artisan of Barcelona, the gay and voluptuous Andalucian, the sly
vindictive Valencian, are as essentially different from each other as so
many distinct characters at the same masquerade. It will therefore be
more convenient to the traveller to take each province by itself and
treat it in detail, keeping on the look-out for those peculiarities,
those social and natural characteristics or idiosyncracies which
particularly belong to each division, and distinguish it from its
neighbours. The Spaniards who have written on their own geography and
statistics, and who ought to be supposed to understand their own country
and institutions the best, have found it advisable to adopt this
arrangement from feeling the utter impossibility of treating Spain
(where union is not unity) as a whole. There is no king of _Spain_:
among the infinity of kingdoms, the list of which swells out the royal
style, that of “Spain” is not found; he is King of the Spains, Rex
Hispaniarum, _Rey de las Españas_, not “_Rey de España_.” Philip II.,
called by his countrymen _el prudente_, the prudent, wishing to fuse
down his heterogeneous subjects, was desirous after his conquest of
Portugal, which consolidated his dominion, to call himself King of
Spain, which he then really was; but this alteration of title was beyond
the power of even his despotism; such was the opposition of the kingdoms
of Arragon and Navarre, which never gave up the hopes of shaking off the
yoke of Castile, and recovering their former independence, while the
empire provinces of New and Old Castile refused in anywise to compromise
their claims of pre-eminence. They from early times, as now, took the
lead in national nomenclature; hence “_Castellano_,” Castilian, is
synonymous with Spaniard, and particularly with the proud genuine older
stock. “_Castellano á las derechas_,” means a Spaniard to the backbone;
“_Hablar Castellano_,” to speak Castilian, is the correct expression for
speaking the Spanish language. Spain again was long without the
advantage of a fixed metropolis, like Rome, Paris, or London, which have
been capitals from their foundation, and recognized and submitted to as
such; here, the cities of Leon, Burgos, Toledo, Seville, Valladolid,
and others, have each in their turns been the capitals of the kingdom.
This constant change and short-lived pre-eminence has weakened any
prescriptive superiority of one city over another, and has been a cause
of national weakness by raising up rivalries and disputes about
precedence, which is one of the most fertile sources of dissension among
a punctilious people. In fact the king was the state, and wherever he
fixed his head-quarters was the court, _La Corte_, a word still
synonymous with Madrid, which now claims to be the only residence of the
Sovereign--the residenz, as Germans would say; otherwise, when compared
with the cities above mentioned, it is a modern place; from not having a
bishop or cathedral, of which latter some older cities possess two, it
has not even the rank of a _ciudad_, or city, but is merely denominated
_villa_, or town. In moments of national danger it exercises little
influence over the Peninsula: at the same time, from being the seat of
the court and government, and therefore the centre of patronage and
fashion, it attracts from all parts those who wish to make their
fortune; yet the capital has a hold on the ambition rather than on the
affections of the nation at large. The inhabitants of the different
provinces think, indeed, that Madrid is the greatest and richest court
in the world, but their hearts are in their native localities. “_Mi
paisano_,” my fellow-countryman, or rather my fellow-county-man,
fellow-parishioner, does not mean Spaniard, but Andalucian, Catalonian,
as the case may be. When a Spaniard is asked, Where do you come from?
the reply is, “_Soy hijo de Murcia--hijo de Granada_,” “I am a son of
Murcia--a son of Granada,” &c. This is strictly analogous to the
“Children of Israel,” the “Beni” of the Spanish Moors, and to this day
the Arabs of Cairo call themselves _children_ of that town, “_Ibn el
Musr_,” &c.; and just as the Milesian Irishman is “a _boy_ from
Tipperary,” &c., and ready to fight with any one who is so also, against
all who are not of that ilk; similar too is the clanship of the
Highlander; indeed, everywhere, not perhaps to the same extent as in
Spain, the being of the same province or town creates a powerful
freemasonry; the parties cling together like old school-fellows. It is a
_home_ and really binding feeling. To the spot of their birth all their
recollections, comparisons, and eulogies are turned; nothing to them
comes up to their particular province, that is, their real country. “_La
Patria_,” meaning Spain at large, is a subject of declamation, fine
words, _palabras_--palaver, in which all, like Orientals, delight to
indulge, and to which their grandiloquent idiom lends itself readily;
but their patriotism is parochial, and self is the centre of Spanish
gravity. Like the German, they may sing and spout about _Fatherland_: in
both cases the theory is splendid, but in practice each Spaniard thinks
his own province or town the best in the Peninsula, and himself the
finest fellow in it. From the earliest period down to the present all
observers have been struck with this _localism_ as a salient feature in
the character of the Iberians, who never would amalgamate, never would,
as Strabo said, put their shields together--never would sacrifice their
own local private interest for the general good; on the contrary, in the
hour of need they had, as at present, a constant tendency to separate
into distinct _juntas_, “_collective_” assemblies, each of which only
thought of its own views, utterly indifferent to the injury thereby
occasioned to what ought to have been the common cause of all. Common
danger and interest scarcely can keep them together, the tendency of
each being rather to repel than to attract the other: the common enemy
once removed, they instantly fall to loggerheads among each other,
especially if there be any spoil to be divided: scarcely ever, as in the
East, can the energy of one individual bind the loose staves by the iron
power of a master mind; remove the band, and the centrifugal members
instantaneously disunite. Thus the virility and vitality of the noble
people have been neutralised: they have, indeed, strong limbs and honest
hearts; but, as in the Oriental parable, “a head” is wanting to direct
and govern: hence Spain is to-day, as it always has been, a bundle of
small bodies tied together by a rope of sand, and, being without union,
is also without strength, and has been beaten in detail. The much-used
phrase _Españolismo_ expresses rather a “dislike of foreign dictation,”
and the “self-estimation” of Spaniards, _Españoles sobre todos_, than
any real patriotic love of country, however highly they rate its
excellences and superiority to every other one under heaven: this
opinion is condensed in one of those pithy proverbs which, nowhere more
than in Spain, are the exponents of popular sentiment: it runs
thus,--“_Quien dice España, dice todo_,” which means, “Whoever says
Spain, says everything.” A foreigner may perhaps think this a trifle too
comprehensive and exclusive; but he will do well to express no doubts on
the subject, since he will only be set down by every native as either
jealous, envious, or ignorant, and probably all three.

[Sidenote: DISUNION OF SPANIARDS.]

[Sidenote: ADMIRATION OF SPAIN.]

[Sidenote: M. THIERS IN SPAIN.]

To boast of Spain’s strength, said the Duke of Wellington, is the
national weakness. Every infinitesimal particle which constitutes
_nosotros_, or ourselves, as Spaniards term themselves, will talk of his
country as if the armies were still led to victory by the mighty Charles
V., or the councils managed by Philip II. instead of Louis-Philippe.
Fortunate, indeed, was it, according to a Castilian preacher, that the
Pyrenees concealed Spain when the Wicked One tempted the Son of Man by
an offer of all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. This,
indeed, was predicated in the mediæval or dark ages, but few peninsular
congregations, even in these enlightened times, would dispute the
inference. It was but the other day that a foreigner was relating in a
_tertulia_, or conversazione of Madrid, the well-known anecdote of
Adam’s revisit to the earth. The narrator explained how our first father
on lighting in Italy was perplexed and taken aback; how, on crossing the
Alps into Germany, he found nothing that he could understand--how
matters got darker and stranger at Paris, until on his reaching England
he was altogether lost, confounded, and abroad, being unable to make out
any thing. Spain was his next point, where, to his infinite
satisfaction, he found himself quite at home, so little had things
changed since his absence, or indeed since the sun at its creation first
shone over Toledo. The story concluded, a distinguished Spaniard, who
was present, hurt perhaps at the somewhat protestant-dissenting tone of
the speaker, gravely remarked, the rest of the party coinciding,--_Si,
Señor, y tenia razon; la España es Paradiso_--“Adam, Sir, was right, for
Spain is paradise;” and in many respects this worthy, zealous gentleman
was not wrong, although it is affirmed by some of his countrymen that
some portions of it are inhabited by persons not totally exempt from
original sin; thus the Valencians will say of their ravishing _huerta_,
or garden, _Es un paradiso habitado por demonios_,--“It is an Eden
peopled by subjects of his Satanic Majesty.” Again, according to the
natives, Murcia, a land overflowing with milk and honey, where Flora and
Pomona dispute the prize with Ceres and Bacchus, possesses a _cielo y
suelo bueno, el entresuelo malo_, has “a sky and soil that are good,
while all between is indifferent;” which the _entresol_ occupant must
settle to his liking.

Another little anecdote, like a straw thrown up in the air, will point
out the direction in which the wind blows. Monsieur Thiers, the great
historical romance writer, in his recent hand-gallop tour through the
Peninsula, passed a few days only at Madrid; his mind being, as
logicians would say, of a _subjective_ rather than an _objective_ turn,
that is, disposed rather to the consideration of the _ego_, and to
things relating to self, than to those that do not, he scarcely looked
more at any thing there, than he did during his similar run through
London: “Behold,” said the Spaniards, “that little _gabacho_; he dares
not remain, nor raise his eyes from the ground in this land, whose vast
superiority wounds his personal and national vanity.” There is nothing
new in this. The old Castilian has an older saying:--_Si Dios no fuese
Dios, seria rey de las Españas, y el de Francia su cocinero_--“If God
were not God, he would make himself king of the Spains, with him of
France for his cook.” Lope de Vega, without derogating one jot from
these paradisiacal pretensions, used him of England better. His sonnet
on the romantic trip to Madrid ran thus:--

    “Carlos Stuardo soy,
       Que siendo amor mi guia,
     Al _cielo de España_ voy,
       Por ver mi estrella Maria.”

“I am Charles Stuart, who, with love for my guide, hasten to the heaven
Spain to see my star Mary.” The Virgin, it must be remembered, after
whom this infanta was named, is held by every Spaniard to be the
brightest luminary, and the sole empress of heaven.

[Sidenote: GEOGRAPHY OF SPAIN.]




CHAPTER II.

     The Geography of Spain--Zones--Mountains--The Pyrenees--The
     Gabacho, and French Politics.


From Spain being the most southern country in Europe, it is very natural
that those who have never been there, and who in England criticise those
who have, should imagine the climate to be even more delicious than that
of Italy or Greece. This is far from being the fact; some, indeed, of
the sea coasts and sheltered plains in the S. and E. provinces are warm
in winter, and exposed to an almost African sun in summer, but the N.
and W. districts are damp and rainy for the greater part of the year,
while the interior is either cold and cheerless, or sunburnt and
wind-blown: winters have occurred at Madrid of such severity that
sentinels have been frozen to death; and frequently all communication is
suspended by the depth of the snow in the elevated roads over the
mountain passes of the Castiles. All, therefore, who are about to travel
through the Peninsula, are particularly cautioned to consider well their
line of route beforehand, and to select certain portions to be visited
at certain seasons, and thus avoid every local disadvantage.

[Sidenote: GENERAL VIEW OF SPAIN.]

One glance at a map of Europe will convey a clearer notion of the
relative position of Spain in regard to other countries than pages of
letter-press: this is an advantage which every schoolboy possesses over
the Plinys and Strabos of antiquity; the ancients were content to
compare the shape of the Peninsula to that of a bull’s hide, nor was the
comparison ill chosen in some respects. We will not weary readers with
details of latitude and longitude, but just mention that the whole
superficies of the Peninsula, including Portugal, contains upwards of
19,000 square leagues, of which somewhat more than 15,500 belong to
Spain; it is thus almost twice as large as the British Islands, and only
one-tenth smaller than France; the circumference or coast-line is
estimated at 750 leagues. This compact and isolated territory, inhabited
by a fine, hardy, warlike population, ought, therefore, to have rivalled
France in military power, while its position between those two great
seas which command the commerce of the old and new world, its indented
line of coast, abounding in bays and harbours, offered every advantage
of vying with England in maritime enterprise.

Nature has provided commensurate outlets for the infinite productions of
a country which is rich alike in everything that is to be found either
on the face or in the bowels of the earth; for the mines and quarries
abound with precious metals and marbles, from gold to iron, from the
agate to coal, while a fertile soil and every possible variety of
climate admit of unlimited cultivation of the natural productions of the
temperate or tropical zones: thus in the province of Granada the
sugar-cane and cotton-tree luxuriate at the base of ranges which are
covered with eternal snow: a wide range is thus afforded to the
botanist, who may ascend by zones, through every variety of vegetable
strata, from the hothouse plant growing wild, to the hardiest lichen. It
has, indeed, required the utmost ingenuity and bad government of man to
neutralise the prodigality of advantages which Providence has lavished
on this highly favoured land, and which, while under the dominion of the
Romans and Moors, resembled an Eden, a garden of plenty and delight,
when in the words of an old author, there was nothing idle, nothing
barren in Spain--“nihil otiosum, nihil sterile in Híspaniâ.” A sad
change has come over this fair vision, and now the bulk of the Peninsula
offers a picture of neglect and desolation, moral and physical, which it
is painful to contemplate: the face of nature and the mind of man have
too often been dwarfed and curtailed of their fair proportions; they
have either been neglected and their inherent fertility allowed to run
into vice and luxuriant weeds, which it will show against any country in
the world, or their energies have been misdirected, and a capability of
all good converted into an element equally powerful for evil; but pride
and laziness are here as everywhere the keys to poverty, _altivez y
pereza, llaves de pobreza_.

[Sidenote: CLIMATE AND ELEVATION OF SPAIN.]

The geological construction of Spain is very peculiar, and unlike that
of most other countries; it is almost one mountain or agglomeration of
mountains, as those of our countrymen who are speculating in Spanish
railroads are just beginning to discover. The interior rises on every
side from the sea, and the central portions are higher than any other
table-lands in Europe, ranging on an average from two to three thousand
feet above the level of the sea, while from this elevated plain chains
of mountains rise again to a still greater height. Madrid, which stands
on this central plateau, is situated about 2000 feet above the level of
Naples, which lies in the same latitude; the mean temperature of Madrid
is 59°, while that of Naples is 63° 30´; it is to this difference of
elevation that the extraordinary difference of climate and vegetable
productions between the two capitals is to be ascribed. Fruits which
flourish on the coasts of Provence and Genoa, which lie four degrees
more to the north than any portion of Spain, are rarely to be met with
in the elevated interior of the Peninsula: on the other hand, the low
and sunny maritime belts abound with productions of a tropical
vegetation. The mountainous character and general aspect of the coast
are nearly analogous throughout the circuit which extends from the
Basque Provinces to Cape Finisterre; and offer a remarkable contrast to
those sunny alluvial plains which extend, more or less, from Cadiz to
Barcelona, and which closely resemble each other in vegetable
productions, such as the fig, orange, pomegranate, aloe, and carob tree,
which grow everywhere in profusion, except in those parts where the
mountains come down abruptly into the sea itself. Again, the central
districts, composed of vast plains and steppes, _Parameras, Tierras de
campo, y Secanos_, closely resemble each other in their monotonous
denuded aspect, in their scarcity of fruit and timber, and their
abundance of cereal productions.

[Sidenote: ZONES OF SPAIN.]

Spanish geographers have divided the Peninsula into seven distinct
chains of mountains. These commence with the Pyrenees and end with the
Bætican or Andalucian ranges: these _cordilleras_, or lines of lofty
ridges, arise on each side of intervening plains, which once formed the
basins of internal lakes, until the accumulated waters, by bursting
through the obstructions by which they were dammed up, found a passage
to the ocean: the dip or inclination of the country lies from the east
towards the west, and, accordingly, the chief rivers which form the
drains and principal water-sheds of the greater parts of the surface,
flow into the Atlantic: their courses, like the basins through which
they pass, lie in a transversal and almost a parallel direction; thus
the Duero, the Tagus, the Guadiana, and the Guadalquivir, all flow into
their recipient between their distinct chains of mountains. The sources
of the supply to these leading arteries arise in the longitudinal range
of elevations which descends all through the Peninsula, approaching
rather to the eastern than to the western coast, whereby a considerably
greater length is obtained by each of these four rivers, when compared
to the Ebro, which disembogues in the Mediterranean.

The Moorish geographer Alrasi was the first to take difference of
climate as the rule of dividing the Peninsula into distinct portions;
and modern authorities, carrying out this idea, have drawn an imaginary
line, which runs north-east to south-west, thus separating the Peninsula
into the northern, or the boreal and temperate, and the southern or the
torrid, and subdividing these two into four zones: nor is this division
altogether fanciful, for there is no caprice or mistake in tests derived
from the vegetable world; manners may make man, but the sun alone
modifies the plant: man may be fused down by social appliances into one
uniform mass, but the rude elements are not to be civilized, nor can
nature be made cosmopolitan, which heaven forfend.

[Sidenote: ZONES OF SPAIN.]

_The first or northern zone_ is the _Cantabrian_, the European; this
portion skirts the base of the Pyrenees, and includes portions of
Catalonia, Arragon, and Navarre, the Basque provinces, the Asturias, and
Gallicia. This is the region of humidity, and as the winters are long,
and the springs and autumns rainy, it should only be visited in the
summer. It is a country of hill and dale, is intersected by numerous
streams which abound in fish, and which irrigate rich meadows for
pastures. The valleys form the now improving dairy country of Spain,
while the mountains furnish the most valuable and available timber of
the Peninsula. In some parts corn will scarcely ripen, while in others,
in addition to the cerealia, cider and an ordinary wine are produced. It
is inhabited by a hardy, independent, and rarely subdued population,
since the mountainous country offers natural means of defence to brave
highlanders. It is useless to attempt the conquest with a small army,
while a large one would find no means of support in the hungry
localities.

_The second zone_ is the Iberian or eastern, which, in its maritime
portions, is more Asiatic than European, and where the lower classes
partake of the Greek and Carthaginian character, being false, cruel, and
treacherous, yet lively, ingenious, and fond of pleasure: this portion
commences at Burgos, and includes the southern portion of Catalonia and
Arragon, with parts of Castile, Valencia, and Murcia. The sea-coasts
should be visited in the spring and autumn, when they are delicious; but
they are intensely hot in the summer, and infested with myriads of
muskitoes. The districts about Burgos are among the coldest in Spain,
and the thermometer sinks very much below the ordinary average of our
more temperate climate; and as they have little at any time to attract
the traveller, he will do well to avoid them except during the summer
months. The population is grave, sober, and Castilian. The elevation is
very considerable; thus the upper valley of the Miño and some of the
north-western portions of Old Castile and Leon are placed more than 6000
feet above the level of the sea, and the frosts often last for three
months at a time.

[Sidenote: GENERAL DROUGHT OF SPAIN.]

_The third zone_ is the Lusitanian, or western, which is by far the
largest, and includes the central parts of Spain and all Portugal. The
interior of this portion, and especially the provinces of the two
Castiles and La Mancha, both in the physical condition of the soil and
the moral qualities of the inhabitants, presents a very unfavourable
view of the Peninsula, as these inland steppes are burnt up by summer
suns, and are tempest and wind-rent during winter. The general absence
of trees, hedges, and enclosures exposes these wide unprotected plains
to the rage and violence of the elements: poverty-stricken mud houses,
scattered here and there in the desolate extent, afford a wretched home
to a poor, proud, and ignorant population; but these localities, which
offer in themselves neither pleasure nor profit to the stranger, contain
many sites and cities of the highest interest, which none who wish to
understand Spain can possibly pass by unnoticed. The best periods for
visiting this portion of Spain are May and June, or September and
October.

The more western districts of this Lusitanian zone are not so
disagreeable. There in the uplands the ilex and chesnut abound, while
the rich plains produce vast harvests of corn, and the vineyards
powerful red wines. The central table-land, which closely resembles the
plateau of Mexico, forms nearly one-half of the entire area of the
Peninsula. The peculiarity of the climate is its dryness; it is not,
however, unhealthy, being free from the agues and fevers which are
prevalent in the lower plains, river-swamps, and rice-grounds of parts
of Valencia and Andalucia. Rain, indeed, is so comparatively scarce on
this table-land, that the annual quantity on an average does not amount
to more than ten inches. The least quantity falls in the mountain
regions near Guadalupe, and on the high plains of Cuenca and Murcia,
where sometimes eight or nine months pass without a drop falling. The
occasional thunder-storms do but just lay the dust, since here moisture
dries up quicker even than woman’s tears. The face of the earth is
tanned, tawny, and baked into a veritable terra cotta: everything seems
dead and burnt on a funeral pile. It is all but a miracle how the
principle of life in the green herb is preserved, since the very grass
appears scorched and dead; yet when once the rains set in, vegetation
springs up, phœnix-like, from the ashes, and bursts forth in an
inconceivable luxuriance and life. The ripe seeds which have fallen on
the soil are called into existence, carpeting the desert with verdure,
gladdening the eye with flowers, and intoxicating the senses with
perfume. The thirsty chinky dry earth drinks in these genial showers,
and then rising like a giant refreshed with wine, puts forth all its
strength; and what vegetation is, where moisture is combined with great
heat, cannot even be guessed at in lands of stinted suns. The periods of
rains are the winter and spring, and when these are plentiful, all kinds
of grain, and in many places wines, are produced in abundance. The
olive, however, is only to be met with in a few favoured localities.

[Sidenote: GEOGRAPHY OF SPAIN.]

_The fourth zone_ is the Bætican, which is the most southern and
African; it coasts the Mediterranean, basking at the foot of the
mountains which rise behind and form the mass of the Peninsula: this
mural barrier offers a sure protection against the cold winds which
sweep across the central region. Nothing can be more striking than the
descent from the table elevations into these maritime strips; in a few
hours the face of nature is completely changed, and the traveller passes
from the climate and vegetation of Europe into that of Africa. This
region is characterised by a dry burning atmosphere during a large part
of the year. The winters are short and temperate, and consist rather in
rain than in cold, for in the sunny valleys ice is scarcely known except
for eating; the springs and autumns delightful beyond all conception.
Much of the cultivation depends on artificial irrigation, which was
carried by the Moors to the highest perfection: indeed water, under this
forcing, vivifying sun, is the blood of the earth, and synonymous with
fertility: the productions are tropical; sugar, cotton, rice, the
orange, lemon, and date. The _algarrobo_, the carob tree, and the
_adelfa_, the oleander, may be considered as forming boundary marks
between this the _tierra caliente_, or torrid district, and the colder
regions by which it is encompassed.

Such are the geographical divisions of nature with which the vegetable
and animal productions are closely connected; and we shall presently
enter somewhat more fully into the _climate_ of Spain, of which the
natives are as proud as if they had made it themselves. This Bætican
zone, Andalucia, which contains in itself many of the most interesting
cities, sites, and natural beauties of the Peninsula, will always take
precedence in any plan of the traveller, and each of these points has
its own peculiar attractions. These embrace a wide range of varied
scenery and objects; and Andalucia, easy of access, may be gone over
almost at every portion of the year. The winters may be spent at Cadiz,
Seville, or Malaga; the summers in the cool mountains of Ronda, Aracena,
or Granada. April, May, and June, or September, October, and November,
are, however, the most preferable. Those who go in the spring should
reserve June for the mountains; those who go in the autumn should
reverse the plan, and commence with Ronda and Granada, ending with
Seville and Cadiz.

[Sidenote: SPANISH MOUNTAINS.]

Spain, it has thus been shown, is one mountain, or rather a jumble of
mountains,--for the principal and secondary ranges are all more or less
connected with each other, and descend in a serpentising direction
throughout the Peninsula, with a general inclination to the west.
Nature, by thus dislocating the country, seems to have suggested, nay,
almost to have forced, localism and isolation to the inhabitants, who
each in their valleys and districts are shut off from their neighbours,
whom to love, they are enjoined in vain.

The internal communication of the Peninsula, which is thus divided by
the mountain-walls, is effected by some good roads, few and far between,
and which are carried over the most convenient points, where the natural
dips are the lowest, and the ascents and descents the most practicable.
These passes are called _Puertos_--_portæ_, or gates. There are, indeed,
mule-tracks and goat-paths over other and intermediate portions of the
chain, but they are difficult and dangerous, and being seldom provided
with ventas or villages, are fitter for smugglers and bandits than
honest men: the farthest and fairest way about will always be found the
best and shortest road.

The Spanish mountains in general have a dreary and harsh character, yet
not without a certain desolate sublimity: the highest are frequently
capped with snow, which glistens in the clear sky. They are rarely clad
with forest trees; the scarped and denuded ridges cut with a serrated
outline the clean clear blue sky. The granitic masses soar above the
green valley or yellow corn-plains in solitary state, like the castles
of a feudal baron, that lord it over all below, with which they are too
proud to have aught in common. These mountains are seen to greatest
advantage at the rise and setting of the sun, for during the day the
vertical rays destroy all form by removing shadows.

[Sidenote: THE PYRENEES.]

These geographical peculiarities of Spain, and particularly the
existence of the great central elevation, when once attained are apt to
be forgotten. The country rises from the coast, directly in the
north-western provinces, and in some of the southern and eastern, with
an intervening alluvial strip and swell: but when once the ascent is
accomplished, no _real_ descent ever takes place--we are then on the
summit of a vast elevated mass. The roads indeed _apparently_ ascend and
descend, but the mean height is seldom diminished: the interior hills or
plains are undulations of one mountain. The traveller is often deceived
at the apparent low level of snow-clad ranges, such as the Guadarrama;
this will be accounted for by adding the great elevation of their bases
above the level of the sea. The palace of the Escorial, which is placed
at the foot of the Guadarrama, and at the head of a seeming plain,
stands in reality at 2725 feet above Valencia, while the summer
residence of the king at _La Granja_, in the same chain, is thirty feet
higher than the summit of Vesuvius. This, indeed, is a castle in the
air--a château en Espagne, and worthy of the most German potentate to
whom that element belongs, as the sea does to Britannia. The mean
temperature on the plateau of Spain is as 15° Réaumur, while that of the
coast is as 18° and 19°, in addition to the protection from cutting
winds which their mountainous backgrounds afford; nor is the traveller
less deceived as regards the heights of the interior mountains than he
is with the champaigns, or table-land plains. The eye wanders over a
vast level extent bounded only by the horizon, or a faint blue line of
other distant sierras; this space, which appears one townless level, is
intersected with deep ravines, _barrancos_, in which villages lie
concealed, and streams, _arroyos_, flow unperceived. Another important
effect of this central elevation is the searching dryness and
rarefication of the air. It is often highly prejudicial to strangers;
the least exposure, which is very tempting under a burning sun, will
often bring on ophthalmia, irritable colics, and inflammatory diseases
of the lungs and vital organs. Such are the causes of the _pulmonia_,
which carries off the invalid in a few days, and is the disease of
Madrid. The frozen blasts descending from the snow-clad Guadarrama catch
the incautious passenger at the turning of streets which are roasting
under a fierce sun. Is it to be wondered at, that this capital should be
so very insalubrious? in winter you are frozen alive, in summer baked. A
man taking a walk for the benefit of his health, crosses with his pores
open from an oven to an ice-house; catch-cold introduces the Spanish
doctor, who soon in his turn presents the undertaker.

[Sidenote: THE PYRENEES]

As the Pyrenees possess an European interest at this moment when the
Napoleon of Peace proposes to annihilate their existence, which defied
Louis XIV. and Buonaparte, some details may be not unacceptable. This
gigantic barrier, which divides Spain and France, is connected with the
dorsal chain which comes down from Tartary and Asia. It stretches far
beyond the transversal spine, for the mountains of the Basque
Provinces, Asturias, and Gallicia, are its continuation. The Pyrenees,
properly speaking, extend E. to W., in length about 270 miles, being
both broadest and highest in the central portions, where the width is
about 60 miles, and the elevations exceed 11,000 feet. The spurs and
offsets of this great transversal spine penetrate on both sides into the
lateral valleys like ribs from a back-bone. The central nucleus slopes
gradually E. to the gentle Mediterranean, and W. to the fierce Atlantic,
in a long uneven swell.

This range of mountains was called by the Romans _Montes_ and _Saltus
Pyrenei_, and by the Greeks Πυρηνη, probably from a local
Iberian word, but which they, as usual, catching at sound, not sense,
connected with their Πυρ, and then bolstered up their erroneous
derivation by a legend framed to fit the name, asserting that it either
alluded to _a fire_ through which certain precious metals were
discovered, or because the lofty summits were often struck with
lightning, and dislocated by the volcanos. According to the Iberians,
Hercules, when on his way to “lift” Geryon’s cattle, was hospitably
received by Bebryx, a petty ruler in these mountains; whereupon the
demigod got drunk, and ravished his host’s daughter _Pyrene_, who died
of grief, when Hercules, sad and sober, made the whole range re-echo
with her name; a legend which, like some others in Spain, requires
confirmation, for the Phœnicians called these ranges _Purani_, from
the forests, _Pura_ meaning wood in Hebrew. The Basques have, of course,
their etymology, some saying that the real root is _Biri_, an elevation,
while others prefer _Bierri enac_, the “two countries,” which, separated
by the range, were ruled by Tubal; but when Spaniards once begin with
Tubal, the best plan is to shut the book.

[Sidenote: THE GABACHO.]

The _Maledêta_ is the loftiest peak, although the _Pico del Mediodia_
and the _Canigú_, because rising at once out of plains and therefore
having the greatest apparent altitudes, were long considered to be the
highest; but now these French usurpers are dethroned. Seen from a
distance, the range appears to be one mountain-ridge, with broken
pinnacles, but, in fact, it consists of two distinct lines, which are
parallel, but not continuous. The one which commences at the ocean is
the most forward, being at least 30 miles more in advance towards the
south than the corresponding line, which commences from the
Mediterranean. The centre is the point of dislocation, and here the
ramifications and reticulations are the most intricate, as it is the
key-stone of the system, which is buttressed up by _Las Tres Sorellas_,
the three sisters _Monte Perdido_, _Cylindro_, and _Marboré_. Here is
the source of the Garonne, _La Garona_; here the scenery is the
grandest, and the lateral valleys the longest and widest. The smaller
spurs enclose valleys, down each of which pours a stream: thus the Ebro,
Garona, and Bidasoa are fed from the mountain source. These tributaries
are generally called in France _Gaves_,[1] and in some parts on the
Spanish side _Gabas_; but _Gav_ signifies a “river,” and may be traced
in our _Avon_; and Humboldt derives it from the Basque _Gav_, a “hollow
or ravine;” cavus. The parting of these waters, or their flowing down
either N. or S., should naturally mark the line of division between
France and Spain: such, however, is not the case, as part of _Cerdaña_
belongs to France, while _Aran_ belongs to Spain; thus each country
possesses a key in its neighbour’s territory. It is singular that this
obvious inconvenience should not have been remedied by some exchange
when the long-disputed boundary-question was settled between Charles IV.
and the French republic.

[Sidenote: THE PYRENEES.]

Most of the passes over this Alpine barrier are impracticable for
carriages, and remain much in the same state as in the time of the
Moors, who from them called the Pyrenean range _Albort_, from the Roman
_Portæ_, the ridge of “gates.” Many of the wild passes are only known to
the natives and smugglers, and are often impracticable from the snow;
while even in summer they are dangerous, being exposed to mists and the
hurricanes of mighty rushing winds. The two best carriageable lines of
inter-communication are placed at each extremity: that to the west
passes through Irun; that to the east through Figueras.

The Spanish Pyrenees offer few attractions to the lovers of the fleshly
comforts of cities; but the scenery, sporting, geology, and botany are
truly Alpine, and will well repay those who can “rough it” considerably.
The contrast which the unfrequented Spanish side offers to the crowded
opposite one is great. In Spain the mountains themselves are less
abrupt, less covered with snow, while the numerous and much frequented
baths in the French Pyrenees have created roads, diligences, hotels,
tables-d’hôte, cooks, Ciceronis, donkeys, and so forth; for the Badauds
de Paris who babble about green fields and _des belles horreurs_, but
who seldom go beyond the immediate vicinity and hackneyed “lions.” A
want of good taste and real perception of the sublime and beautiful is
nowhere more striking, says Mr. Erskine Murray, than on the French side,
where mankind remains profoundly ignorant of the real beauties of the
Pyrenees, which have been chiefly explored by the English, who love
nature with all their heart and soul, who worship her alike in her
shyest retreats and in her wildest forms. Nevertheless, on the north
side many comforts and appliances for the tourist are to be had; nay,
invalids and ladies in search of the picturesque can ascend to the
_Brèche de Roland_. Once, however, cross the frontier, and a sudden
change comes over all facilities of locomotion. Stern is the first
welcome of the “hard land of Iberia,” scarce is the food for body or
mind, and deficient the accommodation for man or beast, and simply
because there is small demand for either. No Spaniard ever comes here
for pleasure; hence the localities are given up to the smuggler and
izard.

[Sidenote: FRENCH POLICY.]

The Oriental inæsthetic incuriousness for _things_, old stones, wild
scenery, &c., is increased by political reasons and fears. The
neighbour, from the time of the Celt down to to-day, has ever been the
coveter, ravager, and terror of Spain: her “knavish tricks,” fire and
rapine are too numerous to be blinked or written away, too atrocious to
be forgiven: to revenge becomes a sacred duty. However governments may
change, the policy of France is immutable. Perfidy, backed by violence,
“ruse doublée de force,” is the state maxim from Louis XIV. and
Buonaparte down to Louis-Philippe: the principle is the same, whether
the instrument employed be the sword or wedding ring. The weaker Spain
is thus linked in the embrace of her stronger neighbour, and has been
made alternately her dupe and victim, and degraded into becoming a mere
satellite, to be dragged along by fiery Mars. France has forced her to
share all her bad fortune, but never has permitted her to participate in
her success. Spain has been tied to the car of her defeats, but never
has been allowed to mount it in the day of triumph. Her friendship has
always tended to denationalise Spain, and by entailing the forced enmity
of England, has caused to her the loss of her navies and colonies in the
new world.

“The Pyrenean boundary,” says the Duke of Wellington, “is the most
vulnerable frontier of France, probably the only vulnerable one;”
accordingly she has always endeavoured to dismantle the Spanish defences
and to foster insurrections and _pronunciamientos_ in Catalonia, for
Spain’s infirmity is her opportunity, and therefore the “sound policy”
of the rest of Europe is to see Spain strong, independent, and able to
hold her own Pyrenean key.

[Sidenote: THE PYRENEES.]

While France therefore has improved her means of approach and invasion,
Spain, to whom the past is prophetic of the future, has raised
obstacles, and has left her protecting barrier as broken and hungry as
when planned by her tutelar divinity. Nor are her highlanders more
practicable than their granite fastnesses. Here dwell the smuggler, the
rifle sportsman, and all who defy the law: here is bred the hardy
peasant, who, accustomed to scale mountains and fight wolves, becomes a
ready raw material for the _guerrilleros_, and none were ever more
formidable to Rome or France than those marshalled in these glens by
Sertorius and Mina. When the tocsin bell rings out, a hornet swarm of
armed men, the weed of the hills, starts up from every rock and brake.
The hatred of the Frenchman, which the Duke said formed “part of a
Spaniard’s nature,” seems to increase in intensity in proportion to
vicinity, for as they touch, so they fret and rub each other: here it
is the antipathy of an antithesis; the incompatibility of the saturnine
and slow, with the mercurial and rapid; of the proud, enduring, and
ascetic, against the vain, the fickle, and sensual; of the enemy of
innovation and change, to the lover of variety and novelty; and however
tyrants and tricksters may assert in the gilded galleries of Versailles
that _Il n’y a plus de Pyrénées_, this party-wall of Alps, this barrier
of snow and hurricane, does and will exist for ever: placed there by
Providence, as was said by the Gothic prelate Saint Isidore, they ever
have forbidden and ever will forbid the banns of an unnatural alliance,
as in the days of Silius Italicus:

    “Pyrene celsâ nimbosi verticis arce
     Divisos Celtis laté prospectat Hiberos
     Atque æterna tenet magnis _divortia_ terris.”

If the eagle of Buonaparte could never build in the Arragonese Sierra,
the lily of the Bourbon assuredly will not take root in the Castilian
plain; so sings Ariosto:

    ---- “Che non lice
    Che ’l giglio in quel terreno habbia radice!”

[Sidenote: THE PYRENEES.]

This inveterate condition either of pronounced hostility, or at best of
armed neutrality, has long rendered these localities disagreeable to the
man of the note-book. The rugged mountain frontiers consist of a series
of secluded districts, which constitute the entire world to the natives,
who seldom go beyond the natural walls by which they are bounded, except
to smuggle. This vocation is the curse of the country; it fosters a wild
reliance on self-defence, a habit of border foray and insurrection,
which seems as necessary to them as a moral excitement and combustible
element, as carbon and hydrogen are in their physical bodies. Their
habitual suspicion against prying foreigners, which is an Oriental and
Iberian instinct, converts a curious traveller into a spy or partisan.
Spanish authorities, who seldom do these things except on compulsion,
cannot understand the gratuitous braving of hardship and danger for its
own sake--the botanizing and geologizing, &c., of the nature and
adventure-loving English. The _impertinente curioso_ may possibly escape
observation in a Spanish city and crowd, but in these lonely hills it is
out of the question: he is the observed of all observers; and they,
from long smuggling and sporting habits, are always on the look-out,
and are keen-sighted as hawks, gipseys, and beasts of prey. Latterly
some who, by being placed immediately under the French boundary, have
seen the glitter of our tourists’ coin, have become more humanized, and
anxious to obtain a share in the profits of the season.

[Sidenote: THE PYRENEES.]

The geology and botany have yet to be properly investigated. In the
metal-pregnant Pyrenees rude forges of iron abound, but everything is
conducted on a small, unscientific scale, and probably after the
unchanged primitive Iberian system. Fuel is scarce, and transport of
ores on muleback expensive. The iron is at once inferior to the English
and much dearer: the tools and implements used on both sides of the
Pyrenees are at least a century behind ours; while absurd tariffs, which
prevent the importation of a cheaper and better article, retard
improvements in agriculture and manufactures, and perpetuate poverty and
ignorance among backward, half-civilised populations. The timber,
moreover, has suffered much from the usual neglect, waste, and
improvidence of the natives, who destroy more than they consume, and
never replant. The sporting in these lonely wild districts is excellent,
for where man seldom penetrates the feræ naturæ multiply: the bear is,
however, getting scarce, as a premium is placed on every head destroyed.
The grand object is the _Cabra Montanez_, or _Rupicapra_, German
Steinbock, the Bouquetin of the French, the Izard (_Ibex_, becco, bouc,
bock, buck). The fascination of this pursuit, like that of the Chamois
in Switzerland, leads to constant and even fatal accidents, as this shy
animal lurks in almost inaccessible localities, and must be stalked with
the nicest skill. The sporting on the north side is far inferior, as the
cooks of the table-d’hôtes have waged a _guerra al cuchillo_, a war to
the knife, and fork too, against even _les petits oiseaux_; but your
French _artiste_ persecutes even minnows, as all _sport_ and fair play
is scouted, and everything gives way for the pot. The Spaniards, less
mechanical and gastronomic, leave the feathered and finny tribes in
comparative peace. Accordingly the streams abound with trout, and those
which flow into the Atlantic with salmon. The lofty Pyrenees are not
only alembics of cool crystal streams, but contain, like the heart of
Sappho, sources of warm springs under a bosom of snow. The most
celebrated issue on the north side, or at least those which are the most
known and frequented, for the Spaniard is a small bather, and no great
drinker of medicinal waters. Accommodations at the baths on his side
scarcely exist, while even those in France are paltry when compared to
the spas of Germany, and dirty and indecent when contrasted with those
of England. The scenery is alpine, a jumble of mountain, precipice,
glacier, and forest, enlivened by the cataract or hurricane. The
natives, when not smugglers or _guerrilleros_, are rude, simple, and
pastoral: they are poor and picturesque, as people are who dwell in
mountains. _Plains_ which produce “bread stuffs” may be richer, but what
can a traveller or painter do with their monotonous commonplace?

In these wild tracts the highlanders in summer lead their flocks up to
mountain huts and dwell with their cattle, struggling against poverty
and wild beasts, and endeavouring really to keep the wolf from the door:
their watch-dogs are magnificent; the sheep are under admirable
control--being, as it were, in the presence of the enemy, they know the
voice of their shepherds, or rather the peculiar whistle and cry: their
wool is largely smuggled into France, and when manufactured in the shape
of coarse cloth is then re-smuggled back again.

[Sidenote: THE RIVERS OF SPAIN.]




CHAPTER III.

     The Rivers of Spain--Bridges--Navigation--The Ebro and Tagus.


[Sidenote: SPANISH RIVERS.]

There are six great rivers in Spain,--the arteries which run between the
seven mountain chains, the vertebræ of the geological skeleton. These
water-sheds are each intersected in their extent by others on a minor
scale, by valleys and indentations, in each of which runs its own
stream. Thus the rains and melted snows are all collected in an infinity
of ramifications, and are carried by these tributary conduits into one
of the main trunks, which all, with the exception of the Ebro, empty
themselves into the Atlantic. The Duero and Tagus, unfortunately for
Spain, disembogue in Portugal, and thus become a portion of a foreign
dominion exactly where their commercial importance is the greatest.
Philip II. saw the true value of the possession of an angle which
rounded Spain, and insured to her the possession of these valuable
outlets of internal produce, and inlets for external commerce. Portugal
annexed to Spain gave more real power to his throne than the dominion of
entire continents across the Atlantic, and is the secret object of every
Spanish government’s ambition. The _Miño_, which is the shortest of
these rivers, runs through a bosom of fertility. The _Tajo_, Tagus,
which the fancy of poets has sanded with gold and embanked with roses,
tracks much of its dreary way through rocks and comparative barrenness.
The _Guadiana_ creeps through lonely Estremadura, infecting the low
plains with miasma. The _Guadalquivir_ eats out its deep banks amid the
sunny olive-clad regions of Andalucia, as the Ebro divides the levels of
Arragon. Spain abounds with brackish streams, _Salados_, and with
salt-mines, or saline deposits after the evaporation of the sea-waters;
indeed, the soil of the central portions is so strongly impregnated with
“villainous saltpetre,” that the small province of La Mancha alone could
furnish materials to blow up the world; the surface of these regions,
always arid, is every day becoming more so, from the singular antipathy
which the inhabitants of the interior have against trees. There is
nothing to check the power of rapid evaporation, no shelter to protect
or preserve moisture. The soil becomes more and more parched and dried
up, insomuch that in some parts it has almost ceased to be available for
cultivation: another serious evil, which arises from want of
plantations, is, that the slopes of hills are everywhere liable to
constant denudation of soil after heavy rain. There is nothing to break
the descent of the water; hence the naked, barren stone summits of many
of the sierras, which have been pared and peeled of every particle
capable of nourishing vegetation: they are skeletons where life is
extinct; not only is the soil thus lost, but the detritus washed down
either forms bars at the mouths of rivers, or chokes up and raises their
beds; they are thus rendered liable to overflow their banks, and convert
the adjoining plains into pestilential swamps. The supply of water,
which is afforded by periodical rains, and which ought to support the
reservoirs of rivers, is carried off at once in violent floods, rather
than in a gentle gradual disembocation. From its mountainous character
Spain has very few lakes, as the fall is too considerable to allow water
to accumulate; the exceptions which do exist might with greater
propriety be termed lochs--not that they are to be compared in size or
beauty to some of those in Scotland. The volume in the principal rivers
of Spain has diminished, and is diminishing; thus some which once were
navigable, are so no longer, while the artificial canals which were to
have been substituted remain unfinished: the progress of deterioration
advances, while little is done to counteract or amend what every year
must render more difficult and expensive, while the means of repair and
correction will diminish in equal proportion, from the poverty
occasioned by the evil, and by the fearful extent which it will be
allowed to attain. However, several grand water-companies have been
lately formed, who are to dig Artesian wells, finish canals, navigate
rivers with steamers, and _issue shares at a premium_, which will be
effected if nothing else is.

[Sidenote: SPANISH BRIDGES.]

The rivers which are really adapted to navigation are, however, only
those which are perpetually fed by those tributary streams that flow
down from mountains which are covered with snow all the year, and these
are not many. The majority of Spanish rivers are very scanty of water
during the summer time, and very rapid in their flow when filled by
rains or melting snow: during these periods they are impracticable for
boats. They are, moreover, much exhausted by being drained off,
_sangrado_--that is, bled, for the purposes of artificial irrigation;
thus, at Madrid and Valencia, the wide beds of the Manzanares and the
Turia are frequently dry as the sands of the seashore when the tide is
out. They seem only to be entitled to be called rivers by courtesy,
because they have so many and such splendid bridges; as numerous are the
jokes cut by the newly-arrived stranger, who advises the townsfolk to
sell one of them to purchase water, or compares their thirsting arches
to the rich man in torments, who prays for one drop; but a heavy rain in
the mountains soon shows the necessity for their strength and length,
for their wide and lofty arches, their buttress-like piers, which before
had appeared to be rather the freaks of architectural magnificence than
the works of public utility. Those who live in a comparatively level
country can scarcely form an idea of the rapidity and fearful
destruction of the river inundations in this land of mountains. The
deluge rolls forth in an avalanche, the rising water coming down tier
above tier like a flight of steps let loose. These tides carry
everything before them--scarring and gullying up the earth, tearing down
rocks, trees, and houses, and strewing far and wide the relics of ruin;
but the fierce fury is short-lived, and is spent in its own violence;
thus the traveller at Madrid, if he wishes to see its Thames, should run
down or take the ’bus as he can, when it rains, or the river will be
gone before he gets there. When the Spaniards, under those blockheads
Blake and Cuesta, lost the battle of _Rio Seco_, which gave Madrid to
Buonaparte, the French soldiers, in crossing the _dry river_ bed in
pursuit of the fugitives, exclaimed,--“Why Spanish rivers run away too!”

[Sidenote: THE EBRO.]

Many of these beds serve in remote districts, where highways and bridges
are thought to be superfluous luxuries, for the double purposes of a
river when there is water in them, and as a road when there is not.
Again, in this land of anomalies, some streams have no bridges, while
other bridges have no streams; the most remarkable of these _pontes
asinorum_ is at Coria, where the Alagon is crossed at an inconvenient,
and often dangerous ferry, while a noble bridge of five arches stands
high and dry in the meadows close by. This has arisen from the river
having quitted its old channel in some inundation; or, as Spaniards say,
_salido de su madre_, gone out from its mother, who does not seem to
know that it is out, or certainly does not care, since no steps have
ever been taken by the Corians to coax it back again under its old
arches; they call on Hercules to turn this Alpheus, and rely in the
meantime on their proverb, that all fickle, unfaithful rivers repent and
return to their legitimate beds after a thousand years, for nothing is
hurried in Spain, _Despues de anos mil, vuelve el rio a su cubil_. On
the fishing in these wandering streams we shall presently say something.

The navigation of Spanish rivers is Oriental, classical, and imperfect;
the boats, barges, and bargemen carry one back beyond the mediæval ages,
and are better calculated for artistical than commercial purposes. The
“great river,” the Guadalquivir, which was navigable in the time of the
Romans as far as Cordova, is now scarcely practicable for
sailing-vessels of a moderate size even up to Seville. Passengers,
however, have facilities afforded them by the steamers which run
backwards and forwards between this capital and Cadiz; these
conveniences, it need not be said, were introduced from England,
although the first steamer that ever paddled in waters was of Spanish
invention, and was launched at Barcelona in 1543; but the Spanish
Chancellor of the Exchequer of the time was a poor red tapist, and
opposed the whole thing, which, as usual, fell to the ground. The
steamers on the Guadalquivir are safe; indeed, in our times, the
advertisements always stated that a mass was said before starting in the
heretical contrivance, just as to this day Birmingham locomotives, when
a railway is first opened in France, are sprinkled with holy water, and
blessed by a bishop, which may be a new “wrinkle” to Mr. Hudson and the
primate of York.

[Sidenote: THE TAGUS.]

There is considerable talk in Arragon about rendering the Ebro
navigable, and it has been surveyed this year by two engineers--English
of course. The local newspapers compared the astonishment of the herns
and peasantry, created on the banks by this arrival, as second only to
that occasioned when Don Quixote and Sancho ventured near the same spot
into the enchanted bark.

There has been still older and greater talk about establishing a water
communication between Lisbon and Toledo, by means of the Tagus. This
mighty river, which is in every body’s mouth, because the capital of the
kingdom of Port wine is placed at its embouchure, is in fact almost as
little known in Spain and out of it, as the Niger. It has been our fate
to behold it in many places and various phases of its most poetical and
picturesque course--first green and arrowy amid the yellow corn fields
of New Castile; then freshening the sweet Tempe of Aranjuez, clothing
the gardens with verdure, and filling the nightingale-tenanted glens
with groves; then boiling and rushing around the granite ravines of
rock-built Toledo, hurrying to escape from the cold shadows of its deep
prison, and dashing joyously into light and liberty, to wander far away
into silent plains, and on to Talavera, where its waters were dyed with
brave blood, and gladly reflected the flash of the victorious bayonets
of England,--triumphantly it rolls thence, under the shattered arches of
Almaraz, down to desolate Estremadura, in a stream as tranquil as the
azure sky by which it is curtained, yet powerful enough to force the
mountains at Alcantara. There the bridge of Trajan is worth going a
hundred miles to see; it stems the now fierce condensed stream, and ties
the rocky gorges together; grand, simple, and solid, tinted by the
tender colours of seventeen centuries, it looms like the grey skeleton
of Roman power, with all the sentiment of loneliness, magnitude, and the
interest of the past and present. Such are the glorious scenes we have
beheld and sketched; such are the sweet waters in which we have
refreshed our dusty and weary limbs.

[Sidenote: THE TAGUS.]

How stern, solemn, and striking is this Tagus of Spain! No commerce has
ever made it its highway--no English steamer has ever civilized its
waters like those of France and Germany. Its rocks have witnessed
battles, not peace; have reflected castles and dungeons, not quays or
warehouses: few cities have risen on its banks, as on those of the
Thames and Rhine; it is truly a river of Spain--that isolated and
solitary land. Its waters are without boats, its banks without life; man
has never laid his hand upon its billows, nor enslaved their free and
independent gambols.

It is impossible to read Tom Campbell’s admirable description of the
Danube before its poetry was discharged by the smoke of our ubiquitous
countrymen’s Dampf Schiff, without applying his lines to this
uncivilised Tagus:--

    “Yet have I loved thy wild abode,
       Unknown, unploughed, untrodden shore,
     Where scarce the woodman finds a road,
       And scarce the fisher plies an oar;
     For man’s neglect I love thee more,
       That art nor avarice intrude
     To tame thy torrent’s thunder shock,
     Or prune the vintage of thy rock,
             Magnificently rude!”

As rivers in a state of nature are somewhat scarce in Great Britain, one
more extract may be perhaps pardoned, and the more as it tends to
illustrate Spanish character, and explain _las cosas de España_, or the
things of Spain, which it is the object of these humble pages to
accomplish.

The Tagus rises in that extraordinary jumble of mountains, full of
fossil bones, botany, and trout, that rise between Cuenca and Teruel,
and which being all but unknown, clamour loudly for the disciples of
Isaac Walton and Dr. Buckland. It disembogues into the sea at Lisbon,
having flowed 375 miles in Spain, of which nature destined it to be the
aorta. The Toledan chroniclers derive the name from Tagus, fifth king of
Iberia, but Bochart traces it to _Dag_, Dagon, a fish, as besides being
considered auriferous, the ancients pronounced it to be piscatory. Not
that the present Spaniards trouble their head more about the fishes here
than if they were crocodiles. Grains of gold are indeed found, but
barely enough to support a poet, by amphibious paupers, called
_artesilleros_ from their baskets, in which they collect the sand, which
is passed through a sieve.

[Sidenote: NAVIGATION OF THE TAGUS.]

The Tagus might easily be made navigable to the sea, and then with the
Xarama connect Madrid and Lisbon, and facilitate importation of colonial
produce, and exportation of wine and grain. Such an act would confer
more benefits upon Spain than ten thousand _charters_ or paper
constitutions, guaranteed by the sword of Narvaez, or the word and
honour of Louis-Philippe. The performance has been contemplated by many
_foreigners_, the Toledans looking lazily on; thus in 1581, Antonelli, a
Neapolitan, and Juanelo Turriano, a Milanese, suggested the scheme to
Philip II., then master of Portugal; but money was wanting--the old
story--for his revenues were wasted in relic-removing and in building
the useless Escorial, and nothing was made except water parties, and
odes to the “wise and great king” who _was_ to perform the deed, to the
tune of Macbeth’s witches, “_I’ll do, I’ll do, I’ll do_,” for here the
future is preferred to the present tense. The project dozed until 1641,
when two other _foreigners_, Julio Martelli and Luigi Carduchi, in vain
roused Philip IV. from his siesta, who soon after losing Portugal
itself, forthwith forgot the Tagus. Another century glided away, when in
1755 Richard Wall, an Irishman, took the thing up; but Charles III.,
busy in waging French wars against England, wanted cash. The Tagus has
ever since, as it roared over its rocky bed, like an unbroken barb,
laughed at the Toledan who dreamily angles for impossibilities on the
bank, invoking Brunel, Hercules, and Rothschild, instead of putting his
own shoulder to the water-wheel. In 1808 the scheme was revived: Fro
Xavier de Cabanas, who had studied in England our system of canals,
published a survey of the whole river; this folio ‘_Memoria sobre la
Navigation del Tajo_,’ or, ‘Memoir on the Navigation of the Tagus,’
Madrid, 1829, reads like the blue book of one discovering the source of
the Nile, so desert-like are the unpeopled, uncultivated districts
between Toledo and Abrantes. Ferd. VII. thereupon issued an approving
_paper_ decree, and so there the thing ended, although Cabanas had
engaged with Messrs. Wallis and Mason for the machinery, &c. Recently
the project has been renewed by Señor Bermudez de Castro, an intelligent
gentleman, who, from long residence in England, has imbibed the schemes
and energy of the foreigner. _Verémos!_ “we shall see;” for hope is a
good breakfast but a bad supper, says Bacon; and in Spain things are
begun late in the day, and never finished; so at least says the
proverb:--_En España se empieza tarde, y se acaba nunca_.

[Sidenote: DIVISION INTO PROVINCES.]




CHAPTER IV.

     Divisions into Provinces--Ancient Demarcations--Modern
     Departments--Population--Revenue--Spanish Stocks.


In the divisions of the Peninsula which are effected by mountains,
rivers, and climate, a leading principle is to be traced throughout, for
it is laid down by the unerring hand of nature. The artificial,
political, and conventional arrangement into kingdoms and provinces is
entirely the work of accident and absence of design.

These provincial divisions were formed by the gradual union of many
smaller and previously independent portions, which have been taken into
Spain as a whole, just as our inconvenient counties constitute the
kingdom of England; for the inconveniences of these results of the ebb
and flow of the different tides in the affairs of man’s dominion--these
boundaries not fixed by the lines and rules of theodolite-armed land
surveyors, use had provided remedies, and long habit had reconciled the
inhabitants to divisions which suited them better than any new
arrangement, however scientifically calculated, according to statistical
and geographical principles.

The French, during their intrusive rule, were horrified at this “chaos
administratif,” this apparent irregularity, and introduced their own
system of _départements_, by which districts were neatly squared out and
people re-arranged, as if Spain were a chess-board and Spaniards mere
pawns--_peones_, or footmen, which this people, calling itself one of
_caballeros_, that is, riders on horses _par excellence_, assuredly is
not: nor, indeed, in this paradise of the church militant, can the moves
of any Spanish bishop or knight be calculated on with mathematical
certainty, since they seldom will take the steps to-morrow which they
did yesterday.

[Sidenote: PROVINCES.]

Accordingly, however specious the theory, it was found to be no easy
matter to carry departementalization out in practice: individuality
laughs at the solemn nonsense of in-door pedants, who would class men
like ferns or shells. The failure in this attempt to remodel ancient
demarcations and recombine antipathetic populations was utter and
complete. No sooner, therefore, had the Duke cleared the Peninsula of
_doctrinaires_ and invaders than the Lion of Castile shook off their
papers from his mane, and reverted like the Italian, on whom the same
experiment was tried, to his own pre-existing divisions, which, however
defective in theory, and unsightly and inconvenient on the map, had from
long habit been found practically to suit better. Recently, in spite of
this experience among other newfangled transpyrenean reforms,
innovations, and botherations, the Peninsula has again been parcelled
out into forty-nine provinces, instead of the former national divisions
of thirteen kingdoms, principalities, and lordships; but long will it be
before these deeply impressed divisions, which have grown with the
growth of the monarchy, and are engraved in the retentive memories of
the people, can be effaced.

Those who are curious in statistical details are referred to the works
of Paez, Antillon, and others, who are considered by Spaniards to be
authorities on vast subjects, which are fitter for a gazetteer or a
handbook than for volumes destined like these for lighter reading; and
assuredly the pages of the respectable Spaniards just named are duller
than the high-roads of Castile, which no tiny rivulet the cheerful
companion of the dusty road ever freshens, no stray flower adorns, no
song of birds gladdens--“dry as the remainder of the biscuit after the
voyage.”

The thirteen divisions have grand and historical names: they belong to
an old and monarchical country, not to a spick and span vulgar
democracy, without title-deeds. They fill the mouth when named, and
conjure up a thousand recollections of the better and more glorious
times of Spain’s palmy power, when there were giants in the land, not
pigmies in Parisian _paletots_, whose only ambition is to ape the
foreigner, and disgrace and denationalize themselves.

[Sidenote: PROVINCES.]

First and foremost _Andalucia_ presents herself, crowned with a
quadruple, not a triple tiara, for the name _los cuatro reinos_, “the
four kingdoms,” is her synonym. They consist of those of Seville,
Cordova, Jaen, and Granada. There is magic and birdlime in the very
letters. Secondly advances the kingdom of _Murcia_, with its
silver-mines, barilla, and palms. Then the gentle kingdom of _Valencia_
appears, all smiles, with fruits and silk. The principality of grim and
truculent _Catalonia_ scowls next on its fair neighbour. Here rises the
smoky factory chimney; here cotton is spun, vice and discontent bred,
and revolutions concocted. The proud and stiff-necked kingdom of
_Arragon_ marches to the west with this Lancashire of Spain, and to the
east with the kingdom of Navarre, which crouches with its green valleys
under the Pyrenees. The three _Basque Provinces_ which abut thereto, are
only called _El Senorio_, “The Lordship,” for the king of all the Spains
is but simple lord of this free highland home of the unconquered
descendants of the aboriginal man of the Peninsula. Here there is much
talk of bullocks and _fueros_, or “privileges;” for when not digging and
delving, these gentlemen by the mere fact of being born here, are
fighting and upholding their good rights by the sword. The empire
province of the _Castiles_ furnishes two coronets to the royal brow; to
wit, that of the older portion, where the young monarchy was nursed, and
that of the newer portion, which was wrested afterwards from the infidel
Moor. The ninth division is desolate _Estremadura_, which has no higher
title than a province, and is peopled by locusts, wandering sheep, pigs,
and here and there by human bipeds. _Leon_, a most time-honoured
kingdom, stretches higher up, with its corn-plains and venerable cities,
now silent as tombs, but in auld lang syne the scenes of mediæval
chivalry and romance. The kingdom of _Gallicia_ and the principality of
the _Asturias_ form the seaboard to the west, and constitute Spain’s
breakwater against the Atlantic.

[Sidenote: POPULATION]

It is not very easy to ascertain the exact population of any country,
much less that of one which does not yet possess the advantages of
public registrars; the people at large, for whom, strange to say, the
pleasant studies of statistics and political economy have small charms,
consider any attempt to number them as boding no good; they have a
well-grounded apprehension of ulterior objects. To “number the people”
was a crime in the East, and many moral and practical difficulties exist
in arriving at a true census of Spain. Thus, while some writers on
statistics hope to flatter the powers that be, by a glowing exaggeration
of national strength, “to boast of which,” says the Duke, “is the
national weakness,” the suspicious _many_, on the other hand, are
disposed to conceal and diminish the truth. We should be always on our
guard when we hear accounts of the past or present population, commerce,
or revenue of Spain. The better classes will magnify them both, for the
credit of their country; the poorer, on the other hand, will appeal _ad
misericordiam_, by representing matters as even worse than they really
are. They never afford any opening, however indirect, to information
which may lead to poll-taxes and conscriptions.

[Sidenote: DIFFERENT RACES.]

The population and the revenue have generally been exaggerated, and all
statements may be much discounted; the present population, at an
approximate calculation, may be taken at about eleven or twelve
millions, with a slow tendency to increase. This is a low figure for so
large a country, and for one which, under the Romans, is said to have
swarmed with inhabitants as busy and industrious as ants; indeed, the
longest period of rest and settled government which this ill-fated land
has ever enjoyed was during the three centuries that the Roman power was
undisputed. The Peninsula is then seldom mentioned by authors; and how
much happiness is inferred by that silence, when the blood-spattered
page of history was chiefly employed to register great calamities,
plagues, pestilences, wars, battles, or the freaks of men, at which
angels weep! Certainly one of the causes which have changed this happy
state of things, has been the numerous and fierce invasions to which
Spain has been exposed; fatal to her has been her gift of beauty and
wealth, which has ever attracted the foreign ravisher and spoiler. The
Goths, to whom a worse name has been given than they deserved in Spain,
were ousted by the Moors, the real and wholesale destroyers; bringing to
the darkling West the luxuries, arts and sciences of the bright East,
they had nothing to learn from the conquered; to them the Goth was no
instructor, as the Roman had been to him; they despised both of their
predecessors, with whose wants and works they had no sympathy, while
they abhorred their creed as idolatrous and polytheistic--down went
altar and image. There was no fair town which they did not destroy;
they exterminated, say their annals, the fowls of the air.

The Gotho-Spaniard in process of time retaliated, and combated the
invader with his own weapons, bettering indeed the destructive lesson
which was taught. The effects of these wars, carried on without treaty,
without quarter, and waged for country and creed, are evident in those
parts of Spain which were their theatre. Thus, vast portions of
Estremadura, the south of Toledo and Andalucia, by nature some of the
richest and most fertile in the world, are now _dehesas y despoblados_,
depopulated wastes, abandoned to the wild bee for his heritage; the
country remains as it was left after the discomfiture of the Moor. The
early chronicles of both Spaniard and Moslem teem with accounts of the
annual forays inflicted on each other, and to which a frontier-district
was always exposed. The object of these border _guerrilla_-warfares was
extinction, _talar, quemar y robar_, to desolate, burn, and rob, to cut
down fruit-trees, to “harry,” to “razzia."[2] The internecine struggle
was that of rival nations and creeds. It was truly Oriental, and such as
Ezekiel, who well knew the Phœnicians, has described: “Go ye after
him through the city and smite; let not your eye have pity, neither have
ye pity; slay utterly old and young, both maids and little children and
women.” The religious duty of smiting the infidel precluded mercy on
both sides alike, for the Christian foray and crusade was the exact
counterpart of the Moslem _algara_ and _algihad_; while, from military
reasons, everything was turned into a desert, in order to create a
frontier Edom of starvation, a defensive glacis, through which no
invading army could pass and live; the “beasts of the field alone
increased.” Nature, thus abandoned, resumed her rights, and has cast off
every trace of former cultivation; and districts the granaries of the
Roman and the Moor, now offer the saddest contrasts to that former
prosperity and industry.

[Sidenote: BUONAPARTE’S INVASION.]

To these horrors succeeded the thinning occasioned by causes of a
bigoted and political nature: the expulsion of the Jews deprived poor
Spain of her bankers, while the final banishment of the Moriscoes, the
remnant of the Moors, robbed the soil of its best and most industrious
agriculturists.

Again, in our time, have the fatal scenes of contending Christian and
Moor been renewed in the struggle for national independence, waged by
Spaniards against the Buonapartist invaders, by whom neither age nor sex
was spared--neither things sacred nor profane; the land is everywhere
scarred with ruins; a few hours’ Vandalism sufficed to undo the works of
ages of piety, wealth, learning and good taste. The French retreat was
worse than their advance: then, infuriated by disgrace and disaster, the
Soults and Massénas vented their spite on the unarmed villagers and
their cottages. But let General Foy describe their progress:--“Ainsi que
la neige précipitée des sommets des Alpes dans les vallons, nos armées
innombrables détruisaient en quelques heures, par leur seul passage, les
ressources de toute une contrée; elles bivouaquaient habituellement, et
à chaque gîte nos soldats démolissaient les maisons bâties depuis un
demi-siècle, pour construire avec les décombres ces longs villages
alignés qui souvent ne devaient durer qu’un jour: au défaut du bois des
forêts les arbres fruitiers, les végétaux précieux, comme le mûrier,
l’olivier, l’oranger, servaient a les réchauffer; les conscrits irrités
à la fois par le besoin et par le danger contractaient _une ivresse
morale_ dont nous ne cherchions pas à les guérir.”

    “So France gets drunk with blood to vomit crime,
     And fatal ever have her saturnalia been.”

Who can fail to compare this habitual practice of Buonaparte’s legions
with the terrible description in Hosea of the “great people and strong”
who execute the dread judgments of heaven?--“A fire devoureth before
them, and behind them a flame burneth; the land is the garden of Eden
before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness, yea, and nothing
shall escape them.”

[Sidenote: REVENUE.]

No sooner were they beaten out by the Duke, than population began to
spring up again, as the bruised flowerets do when the iron heel of
marching hordes has passed on. Then ensued the civil fratricide wars,
draining the land of its males, from which bleeding Spain has not yet
recovered. Insecurity of property and person will ever prove bars to
marriage and increased population.

Again, a deeper and more permanent curse has steadily operated for the
last two centuries, at which Spanish authors long have not dared to
hint. They have ascribed the depopulation of Estremadura to the swarm of
colonist adventurers and emigrants who departed from this province of
Cortes and Pizarro to seek for fortune in the new world of gold and
silver; and have attributed the similar want of inhabitants in Andalucia
to the similar outpouring from Cadiz, which, with Seville, engrossed the
traffic of the Americas. But colonisation never thins a vigorous,
well-conditioned mother state--witness the rapid and daily increase of
population in our own island, which, like Tyre of old, is ever sending
forth her outpouring myriads, and wafts to the uttermost parts of the
sea, on the white wings of her merchant fleets, the blessings of peace,
religion, liberty, order, and civilisation, to disseminate which is the
mission of Great Britain.

The real permanent and standing cause of Spain’s thinly peopled state,
want of cultivation, and abomination of desolation, is BAD GOVERNMENT,
civil and religious; this all who run may read in her lonely land and
silent towns. But Spain, if the anecdote which her children love to tell
be true, will never be able to remove the incubus of this fertile origin
of every evil. When Ferdinand III. captured Seville and died, being a
saint he escaped purgatory, and Santiago presented him to the Virgin,
who forthwith desired him to ask any favours for beloved Spain. The
monarch petitioned for oil, wine, and corn--conceded; for sunny skies,
brave men, and pretty women--allowed; for cigars, relics, garlic, and
bulls--by all means; for a _good government_--“Nay, nay,” said the
Virgin, “that never can be granted; for were it bestowed, not an angel
would remain a day longer in heaven.”

[Sidenote: THE BOLSA.]

The present revenue may be taken at about 12,000,000_l._ or
13,000,000_l._ sterling; but money is compared by Spaniards to oil; a
little will stick to the fingers of those who measure it out; and such
is the robbing and jobbing, the official mystification and peculation,
that it is difficult to get at _facts_ whenever cash is in question. The
revenue, moreover, is badly collected, and at a ruinous per centage, and
at no time during this last century has been sufficient for the national
expenses. Recourse has been had to the desperate experiments of usurious
loans and wholesale confiscations. At one time church pillage and
appropriation was almost the only item in the governmental budget. The
recipients were ready to “prove from Vatel exceedingly well” that the
first duty of a rich clergy was to relieve the necessitous, and the more
when the State was a pauper: croziers are no match for bayonets. This
system necessarily cannot last. Since the reign of Philip II. every act
of dishonesty has been perpetrated. Public securities have been
“repudiated,” interest unpaid, and principal spunged out. No country in
the Old World, or even New drab-coated World, stands lower in financial
discredit. Let all be aware how they embark in Spanish speculations:
however promising in the prospectus, they will, sooner or later, turn
out to be deceptions; and whether they assume the form of loans, lands,
or rails, none are _real_ securities: they are mere castles in the air,
_châteaux en Espagne_: “The earth has bubbles as the water has, and
these are of them.”

For the benefit and information of those who have purchased Iberian
stock, it may be stated that an Exchange, or _Bolsa de Comercio_, was
established at Madrid in 1831. It may be called the _coldest_ spot in
the hot capital, and the _idlest_, since the usual “city article” is
short and sweet, “_sin operaciones_,” or nothing has been bought or
sold. It might be likened to a tomb, with “Here _lies_ Spanish credit”
for its epitaph. If there be a thing which “_La perfide Albion_,” “a
nation of shopkeepers,” dislikes, worse even than a French assignat, it
is a bankrupt. One circumstance is clear, that Castilian _pundonor_, or
point of honour, will rather settle its debts with cold iron and warm
abuse than with gold and thanks.

The Exchange at Madrid was first held at _St. Martin’s_, a saint who
divided his cloak with a supplicant. As comparisons are odious, and bad
examples catching, it has been recently removed to the _Calle del
Desengaño_, the street of “finding out fallacious hopes,” a locality
which the bitten will not deem ill-chosen.

[Sidenote: SPANISH “STOCK."]

As all men in power use their official knowledge in taking advantage of
the turn of the market, the _Bolsa_ divides with the court and army the
moving influence of every _situacion_ or crisis of the moment: clever as
are the ministers of Paris, they are mere tyros when compared to their
colleagues of Madrid in the arts of working the telegraph, gazette, &c.,
and thereby feathering their own nests.

The Stock Exchange is open from ten to three o’clock, where those who
like Spanish funds may buy them as cheap as stinking mackerel; for when
the 3 per cents, of perfidious Albion are at 98, surely Spanish fives at
22 are a tempting investment. The stocks are numerous, and suited to all
tastes and pockets, whether those funded by Aguado, Ardouin, Toreno,
Mendizabal, or Mon, “all honourable men,” and whose punctuality is
_un-remitting_, for in some the principal is consolidated, in others the
interest is deferred; the grand financial object in all having been to
receive as much as possible, and pay back in an inverse ratio--their
leading principle being to bag both principal and interest. As we have
just said, in measuring out money and oil a little will stick to the
cleanest fingers--the Madrid ministers and contractors made fortunes,
and actually “did” the Hebrews of London, as their forefathers spoiled
the Egyptians. But from Philip II. downwards, theologians have never
been wanting in Spain to prove the religious, however painful, duty of
bankruptcy, and particularly in contracts with usurious heretics. The
stranger, when shown over the Madrid bank, had better evince no
impertinent curiosity to see the “Dividend _pay_ office,” as it might
give offence. Whatever be our dear reader’s pursuit in the Peninsula,
let him--

    “Neither a borrower nor lender be,
     For loan oft loseth both itself and friend.”

Beware of Spanish stock, for in spite of official reports, _documentos_,
and arithmetical mazes, which, intricate as an arabesque pattern, look
well on paper without being intelligible; in spite of ingenious
conversions, fundings of interest, coupons--some active, some passive,
and other repudiatory terms and tenses, the present excepted--the
thimblerig is always the same; and this is the question, since national
credit depends on national good faith and surplus income, how can a
country pay interest on debts, whose revenues have long been, and now
are, miserably insufficient for the ordinary expenses of government? You
cannot get blood from a stone; _ex nihilo nihil fit_.

[Sidenote: PUBLIC DEBT.]

Mr. Macgregor’s report on Spain, a truthful exposition of commercial
ignorance, habitual disregard of treaties and violation of contracts,
describes her public _securities_, past and present. Certainly they had
very imposing names and titles--_Juros Bonos_, _Vales reales_,
_Titulos_, &c.,--much more royal, grand, and poetical than our prosaic
_Consols_; but no oaths can attach real value to dishonoured and
good-for-nothing paper. According to some financiers, the public debts
of Spain, previously to 1808, amounted to 83,763,966_l._, which have
since been increased to 279,083,089_l._, farthings omitted, for we like
to be accurate. This possibly may be exaggerated, for the government
will give no information as to its own peculation and mismanagement:
according to Mr. Henderson, 78,649,675_l._ of this debt is due to
English creditors alone, and we wish they may get it, when he gets to
Madrid. In the time of James I., Mr. Howell was sent there on much such
an errand; and when he left it, his “pile of unredressed claims was
higher than himself.” At all events, Spain is over head and ears in
debt, and irremediably insolvent. And yet few countries, if we regard
the fertility of her soil, her golden possessions at home and abroad,
her frugal temperate population, ought to have been less embarrassed;
but Heaven has granted her every blessing, except a good and honest
government. It is either a bully or a craven: satisfaction in
twenty-four hours _à la Bresson_, or a line-of-battle ship off
Malaga--Cromwell’s receipt--is the only argument which these semi-Moors
understand: conciliatory language is held to be weakness: you may obtain
at once from their fears what never will be granted by their sense of
justice.

[Sidenote: TRAVELLING IN SPAIN.]




CHAPTER V.

     Travelling in Spain--Steamers--Roads, Roman, Monastic, and
     Royal--Modern Railways--English Speculations.


Of the many misrepresentations regarding Spain, few are more inveterate
than those which refer to the dangers and difficulties that are there
supposed to beset the traveller. This, the most romantic, racy, and
peculiar country of Europe, may in reality be visited by sea and land,
and throughout its length and breadth, with ease and safety, as all who
have ever been there well know, the nonsense with which Cockney critics
who never have been there scare delicate writers in albums and lady-bird
tourists, to the contrary notwithstanding: the steamers are regular, the
mails and diligences excellent, the roads decent, and the mules
sure-footed; nay, latterly, the _posadas_, or inns, have been so
increased, and the robbers so decreased, that some ingenuity must be
evinced in getting either starved or robbed. Those, however, who are
dying for new excitements, or who wish to make a picture or chapter, in
short, to get up an adventure for the home-market, may manage by a great
exhibition of imprudence, chattering, and a holding out luring baits, to
gratify their hankering, although it would save some time, trouble, and
expense to try the experiment much nearer home.

As our readers live in an island, we will commence with the sea and
steamers.

[Sidenote: STEAMERS.]

The Peninsular and Oriental Navigation Company depart regularly three
times a month from Southampton for Gibraltar. They often arrive at
Corunna in seventy hours, from whence a mail starts directly to Madrid,
which it reaches in three days and a half. The vessels are excellent
sea-boats, are manned by English sailors, and propelled by English
machinery. The passage to Vigo has been made in less than three days,
and the voyage to Cadiz--touching at Lisbon included--seldom exceeds
six. The change of climate, scenery, men, and manners effected by this
week’s trip, is indeed remarkable. Quitting the British Channel we soon
enter the “sleepless Bay of Biscay,” where the stormy petrel is at home,
and where the gigantic swell of the Atlantic is first checked by Spain’s
iron-bound coast, the mountain break-water of Europe. Here _The Ocean_
will be seen in all its vast majesty and solitude: grand in the
tempest-lashed storm, grand in the calm, when spread out as a mirror;
and never more impressive than at night, when the stars of heaven, free
from earth-born mists, sparkle like diamonds over those “who go down to
the sea in ships, and behold the works of the Lord, and his wonders in
the deep.” The land has disappeared, and man feels alike his weakness
and his strength; a thin plank separates him from another world; yet he
has laid his hand upon the billow, and mastered the ocean; he has made
it the highway of commerce, and the binding link of nations.

The steamers which navigate the Eastern coast from Marseilles to Cadiz
and back again, are cheaper indeed in their fares, but by no means such
good sea-boats; nor do they keep their time--the essence of
business--with English regularity. They are foreign built, and worked by
Spaniards and Frenchmen. They generally stop a day at Barcelona,
Valencia, and other large towns, which gives them an opportunity to
replenish coal, and to smuggle. A rapid traveller is also thus enabled
to pay a flying visit to the cities on the seaboard; and thus those
lively authors who comprehend foreign nations with an intuitive
eagle-eyed glance, obtain materials for sundry octavos on the history,
arts, sciences, literature, and genius of Spaniards. But as Mons. Feval
remarks of some of his gifted countrymen, they have merely to scratch
their head, according to the Horatian expression, and out come a number
of volumes, ready bound in calf, as Minerva issued forth armed from the
temple of Jupiter.

[Sidenote: SPANISH ROADS.]

The Mediterranean is a dangerous, deceitful sea, fair and false as
Italia; the squalls are sudden and terrific; then the crews either curse
the sacred name of God, or invoke St. Telmo, according as their notion
may be. We have often been so caught when sailing on these perfidious
waters in these foreign craft, and think, with the Spaniards, that
escape is a miracle. The hilarity excited by witnessing the jabber,
confusion, and lubber proceedings, went far to dispel all present
apprehension, and future also. Some of our poor blue-jackets in case of
a war may possibly escape the fate with which they are threatened in
this French lake. But no wise man will ever go by sea when he can travel
by land, nor is viewing Spain’s coasts with a telescope from the deck,
and passing a few hours in a sea-port, a very satisfactory mode of
becoming acquainted with the country.

The roads of Spain, a matter of much importance to a judicious
traveller, are somewhat a modern luxury, having been only regularly
introduced by the Bourbons. The Moors and Spaniards, who rode on horses
and not in carriages, suffered those magnificent lines with which the
Romans had covered the Peninsula to go to decay; of these there were no
less than twenty-nine of the first order, which were absolutely
necessary to a nation of conquerors and colonists to keep up their
military and commercial communications. The grandest of all, which like
the Appian might be termed the Queen of Roads, ran from Merida, the
capital of Lusitania, to Salamanca. It was laid down like a Cyclopean
wall, and much of it remains to this day, with the grey granite line
stretching across the aromatic wastes, like the vertebræ of an extinct
mammoth. We have followed for miles its course, which is indicated by
the still standing miliary columns that rise above the cistus underwood;
here and there tall forest trees grow out of the stone pavement, and
show how long it has been abandoned by man to Nature ever young and gay,
who thus by uprooting and displacing the huge blocks slowly recovers her
rights. She festoons the ruins with necklaces of flowers and creepers,
and hides the rents and wrinkles of odious, all-dilapidating Time, or
man’s worse neglect, as a pretty maid decorates a shrivelled dowager’s
with diamonds. The Spanish muleteer creeps along by its side in a track
which he has made through the sand or pebbles; he seems ashamed to
trample on this lordly way, for which, in his petty wants, he has no
occasion. Most of the similar roads have been taken up by monks to raise
convents, by burgesses to build houses, by military men to construct
fortifications--thus even their ruins have perished.

[Sidenote: LEGEND OF SANTO DOMINGO.]

The mediæval Spanish roads were the works of the clergy; and the
long-bearded monks, here as elsewhere, were the pioneers of
civilization; they made straight, wide, and easy the way which led to
their convent, their high place, their miracle shrine, or to whatever
point of pilgrimage that was held out to the devout; traffic was soon
combined with devotion, and the service of mammon with that of God. This
imitation of the Oriental practice which obtained at Mecca, is evidenced
by language in which the Spanish term _Feria_ signifies at once a
religious function, a holiday, and a fair. Even saints condescended to
become waywardens, and to take title from the highway. Thus _Santo
Domingo de la Calzada_, “St. Domenick of the _Paved Road_,” was so
called from his having been the first to make one through a part of Old
Castile for the benefit of pilgrims on their way to Compostella, and
this town yet bears the honoured appellation.

This feat and his legend have furnished Southey with a subject of a
droll ballad. The saint having finished his road, next set up an inn or
_Venta_, the Maritornes of which fell in love with a handsome pilgrim,
who resisted; whereupon she hid some spoons in this Joseph’s saddlebags,
who was taken up by the Alcalde, and forthwith hanged. But his parents
some time afterwards passed under the body, which told them that he was
innocent, alive, and well, and all by the intercession of the sainted
road-maker; thereupon they proceeded forthwith to the truculent Alcalde,
who was going to dine off two roasted fowls, and, on hearing their
report, remarked, You might as well tell me that this cock (pointing to
his rôti) would crow; whereupon it did crow, and was taken with its hen
to the cathedral, and two chicks have ever since been regularly hatched
every year from these respectable parents, of which a travelling
ornithologist should secure one for the Zoological Garden. The cock and
hen were duly kept near the high altar, and their white feathers were
worn by pilgrims in their caps. Prudent bagsmen will, however, put a
couple of ordinary roast fowls into their “provend,” for hungry is this
said road to _Logroño_.

[Sidenote: ROAD TO TOLEDO.]

In this land of miracles, anomalies, and contradictions, the roads to
and from this very _Compostella_ are now detestable. In other provinces
of Spain, the star-paved milky way in heaven is called _El Camino de
Santiago_, the road of St. James; but the Gallicians, who know what
their roads really are, namely, the worst on earth, call the milky-way
_El Camino de Jerusalem_, “the road to Jerusalem,” which it assuredly is
not. The ancients poetically attributed this phenomenon to some spilt
milk of Juno.

Meanwhile the roads in Gallicia, although under the patronage of
Santiago, who has replaced the Roman Hermes, are, like his milky-way in
heaven, but little indebted to mortal repairs. The Dean of Santiago is
waywarden by virtue of his office or dignity, and especially
“protector.” The chapter, however, now chiefly profess to make smooth
the road to a better world. They have altogether degenerated from their
forefathers, whose grand object was to construct roads for the pilgrim;
but since the cessation of offering-making Hadjis, little or nothing has
been done in the turnpike-trust line.

Some of the finest roads in Spain lead either to the _sitios_ or royal
pleasure-seats of the king, or wind gently up some elevated and
monastery-crowned mountain like Monserrat. The ease of the despot was
consulted, while that of his subjects was neglected; and the Sultan was
the State, Spain was his property, and Spaniards his serfs, and willing
ones, for as in the East, their perfect equality amongst each other was
one result of the immeasurable superiority of the master of all. Thus,
while he rolled over a road hard and level as a bowling-green, and
rapidly as a galloping team could proceed, to a mere summer residence,
the communication between Madrid and Toledo, that city on which the sun
shone on the day light was made, has remained a mere track ankle-deep in
mud during winter and dust-clouded during summer, and changing its
direction with the caprice of wandering sheep and muleteers; but Bourbon
Royalty never visited this widowed capital of the Goths. The road
therefore was left as it existed if not before the time of Adam, at
least before Mac Adam. There is some talk just now of beginning a
regular road; when it will be finished is another affair.

[Sidenote: ROAD TO LA CORUNA.]

[Sidenote: CROSS ROADS.]

The church, which shared with the state in dominion, followed the royal
example in consulting its own comforts as to roads. Nor could it be
expected in a torrid land, that holy men, whose abdomens occasionally
were prominent and pendulous, should lard the stony or sandy earth like
goats, or ascend heaven-kissing hills so expeditiously as their prayers.
In Spain the primary consideration has ever been the souls, not the
bodies, of men, or legs of beasts. It would seem indeed, from the
indifference shown to the sufferings of these quadrupedal
blood-engines, _Maquinas de sangre_, as they are called, and still more
from the reckless waste of biped life, that a man was of no value until
he was dead; then what admirable contrivances for the rapid travelling
of his winged spirit, first to purgatory, next out again, and thence
from stage to stage to his journey’s end and blessed rest! More money
has been thus expended in masses than would have covered Spain with
railroads, even on a British scale of magnificence and extravagance.

To descend to the roads of the peninsular earth, the principal lines are
nobly planned. These geographical arteries, which form the circulation
of the country, branch in every direction from Madrid, which is the
centre of the system. The road-making spirit of Louis XIV. passed into
his Spanish descendants, and during the reigns of Charles III. and
Charles IV. communications were completed between the capital and the
principal cities of the provinces. These causeways, “_Arrecifes_”--these
royal roads, “_Caminos reales_”--were planned on an almost unnecessary
scale of grandeur, in regard both to width, parapets, and general
execution. The high road to La Coruña, especially after entering Leon,
will stand comparison with any in Europe; but when Spaniards finish
anything it is done in a grand style, and in this instance the expense
was so enormous that the king inquired if it was paved with silver,
alluding to the common Spanish corruption of the old Roman via lata into
“camino de _plata_,” of plate. This and many of the others were
constructed from fifty to seventy years ago, and very much on the M’Adam
system, which, having been since introduced into England, has rendered
our roads so very different from what they were not very long since. The
war in the Peninsula tended to deteriorate the Spanish roads--when
bridges and other conveniences were frequently destroyed for military
reasons, and the exhausted state of the finances of Spain, and troubled
times, have delayed many of the more costly reparations; yet those of
the first class were so admirably constructed at the beginning, that, in
spite of the injuries of war, ruts, and neglect, they may, as a whole,
be pronounced equal to many of the Continent, and are infinitely more
pleasant to the traveller from the absence of pavement. The roads in
England have, indeed, latterly been rendered so excellent, and we are
so apt to compare those of other nations with them, that we forget that
fifty years ago Spain was in advance in that and many other respects.
Spain remains very much what other countries were: she has stood on her
old ways, moored to the anchor of prejudice, while we have progressed,
and consequently now appears behind-hand in many things in which she set
the fashion to England.

The grand royal roads start from Madrid, and run to the principal
frontier and sea-port towns. Thus the capital may be compared to a
spider, as it is the centre of the Peninsular web. These diverging
fan-like lines are sufficiently convenient to all who are about to
journey to any single terminus, but inter-communications are almost
entirely wanting between any one terminus with another. This scanty
condition of the Peninsular roads accounts for the very limited portions
of the country which are usually visited by foreigners, who--the French
especially--keep to one beaten track, the high road, and follow each
other like wild geese; a visit to Burgos, Madrid, and Seville, and then
a steam trip from Cadiz to Valencia and Barcelona, is considered to be
making the grand tour of Spain; thus the world is favoured with volumes
that reflect and repeat each other, which tell us what we know already,
while the rich and rare, the untrodden, unchanged, and truly
Moro-Hispanic portions are altogether neglected, except by the
exceptional few, who venture forth like Don Quixote on their horses, in
search of adventures and the picturesque.

[Sidenote: TRAVELLING.]

[Sidenote: CONTEMPLATED RAILROADS.]

The other roads of Spain are bad, but not much more so than in other
parts of the Continent, and serve tolerably well in dry weather. They
are divided into those which are practicable for wheel-carriages, and
those which are only bridle-roads, or as they call them, “of horseshoe,”
on which all thought of going with a carriage is out of the question;
when these horse or mule tracks are very bad, especially among the
mountains, they compare them to roads for partridges. The cross roads
are seldom tolerable; it is safest to keep the high-road--or, as we have
it in English, the furthest way round is the nearest way home--for there
is no short cut without hard work, says the Spanish proverb, “_ho hay
atajo, sin trabajo_.”

All this sounds very unpromising, but those who adopt the customs of the
country will never find much practical difficulty in getting to their
journey’s end; slowly, it is true, for where leagues and hours are
convertible terms--the Spanish _hora_ being the heavy German
_stunde_--the distance is regulated by the day-light. Bridle-roads and
travelling on horseback, the former systems of Europe, are very Spanish
and Oriental; and where people journey on horse and mule back, the road
is of minor importance. In the remoter provinces of Spain the population
is agricultural and poverty-stricken, unvisiting and unvisited, not
going much beyond their chimney’s smoke. Each family provides for its
simple habits and few wants; having but little money to buy foreign
commodities, they are clad and fed, like the Bedouins, with the
productions of their own fields and flocks. There is little circulation
of persons; a neighbouring fair is the mart where they obtain the annual
supply of whatever luxury they can indulge in, or it is brought to their
cottages by wandering muleteers, or by the smuggler, who is the type and
channel of the really active principle of trade in three-fourths of the
Peninsula. It is wonderful how soon a well-mounted traveller becomes
attached to travelling on horseback, and how quickly he becomes
reconciled to a state of roads which, startling at first to those
accustomed to carriage highways, are found to answer perfectly for all
the purposes of the place and people where they are found.

Let us say a few things on Spanish railroads, for the mania of England
has surmounted the Pyrenees, although confined rather more to words than
deeds; in fact, it has been said that no rail exists, in any country of
either the new world or the old one, in which the Spanish language is
spoken, probably from other objections than those merely philological.
Again, in other countries roads, canals, and traffic usher in the rail,
which in Spain is to precede and introduce them. Thus, by the prudent
delays of national caution and procrastination, much of the trouble and
expense of these intermediate stages will be economized, and Spain will
jump at once from a mediæval condition into the comforts and glories of
Great Britain, the land of restless travellers. Be that as it may, just
now there is much talk of _railroads_, and splendid official and other
_documentos_ are issued, by which the “whole country is to be
intersected (on paper) with a net-work of rapid and bowling-green
communications,” which are to create a “perfect homogeneity among
Spaniards;” for great as have been the labours of Herculean steam, this
amalgamation of the Iberian rope of sand has properly been reserved for
the crowning performance.

It would occupy too much space to specify the infinite lines which are
in contemplation, which may be described when completed. Suffice it to
say, that they almost all are to be effected by the iron and gold of
England. However this _estrangerismo_, this influence of the foreigner,
may offend the sensitive pride, the _Españolismo_ of Spain, the power of
resistance offered by the national indolence and dislike to change, must
be propelled by British steam, with a dash of French revolution. Yet our
speculators might, perhaps, reflect that Spain is a land which never yet
has been able to construct or support even a sufficient number of common
roads or canals for her poor and passive commerce and circulation. The
distances are far too great, and the traffic far too small, to call yet
for the rail; while the geological formation of the country offers
difficulties which, if met with even in England, would baffle the
colossal science and extravagance of our first-rate engineers. Spain is
a land of mountains, which rise everywhere in Alpine barriers, walling
off province from province, and district from district. These mighty
cloud-capped _sierras_ are solid masses of hard stone, and any tunnels
which ever perforate their ranges will reduce that at Box to the delving
of the poor mole. You might as well cover Switzerland and the Tyrol with
a net-work of _level_ lines, as those caught in the aforesaid net will
soon discover to their cost. The outlay of this up-hill work may be in
an inverse ratio to the remuneration, for the one will be enormous, and
the other paltry. The parturient mountains may produce a most musipular
interest, and even that may be “deferred.”

[Sidenote: DIFFICULTIES OF RAILROADS.]

Spain, again, is a land of _dehesas y despoblados_: in these wild
unpeopled wastes, next to travellers, commerce and cash are what is
scarce, while even Madrid, the capital, is without industry or
resources, and poorer than many of our provincial cities. The Spaniard,
a creature of routine and foe to innovations, is not a moveable or
locomotive; local, and a parochial fixture by nature, he hates moving
like a Turk, and has a particular horror of being hurried; long,
therefore, here has an ambling mule answered all the purposes of
transporting man and his goods. Who again is to do the work even if
England will pay the wages? The native, next to disliking regular
sustained labour himself, abhors seeing the foreigner toiling even in
his service, and wasting his gold and sinews in the thankless task. The
villagers, as they always have done, will rise against the stranger and
heretic who comes to “suck the wealth of Spain.” Supposing, however, by
the aid of Santiago and Brunel, that the work were possible and were
completed, how is it to be secured against the fierce action of the sun,
and the fiercer violence of popular ignorance? The first cholera that
visits Spain will be set down as a passenger per rail by the
dispossessed muleteer, who now performs the functions of steam and rail.
He constitutes one of the most numerous and finest classes in Spain, and
is the legitimate channel of the semi-Oriental caravan system. He will
never permit the bread to be taken out of his mouth by this Lutheran
locomotive: deprived of means of earning his livelihood, he, like the
smuggler, will take to the road in another line, and both will become
either robbers or patriots. Many, long, and lonely are the leagues which
separate town from town in the wide deserts of thinly-peopled Spain, nor
will any preventive service be sufficient to guard the rail against the
_guerrilla_ warfare that may then be waged. A handful of opponents in
any cistus-overgrown waste, may at any time, in five minutes, break up
the road, stop the train, stick the stoker, and burn the engines in
their own fire, particularly smashing the luggage-train. What, again,
has ever been the recompense which the foreigner has met with from Spain
but breach of promise and ingratitude? He will be used, as in the East,
until the native thinks that he has mastered his arts, and then he will
be abused, cast out, and trodden under foot; and who then will keep up
and repair the costly artificial undertaking?--certainly not the
Spaniard, on whose pericranium the bumps of operative skill and
mechanical construction have yet to be developed.

[Sidenote: BENEFITS OF RAILROADS.]

The lines which are the least sure of failure will be those which are
the shortest, and pass through a level country of some natural
productions, such as oil, wine, and coal. Certainly, if the rail can be
laid down in Spain by the gold and science of England, the gift, like
that of steam, will be worthy of the Ocean’s Queen, and of the world’s
real leader of civilization; and what a change will then come over the
spirit of the Peninsula! how the siestas of torpid man-vegetation, will
be disturbed by the shrill whistle and panting snort of the monster
engine! how the seals of this long hermetically shut-up land will be
broken! how the cloistered obscure, and dreams of treasures in heaven,
will be enlightened by the flashing fire-demon of the wide-awake
money-worshipper! what owls will be vexed, what bats dispossessed, what
drones, mules, and asses will be scared, run over, and annihilated!
Those who love Spain, and pray, like the author, daily for her
prosperity, must indeed hope to see this “net-work of rails” concluded,
but will take especial care at the same time not to invest one farthing
in the imposing speculation.

Recent results have fully justified during this year what was prophesied
last year in the Hand-Book: our English agents and engineers were
received with almost divine honours by the Spaniards, so incensed were
they with flattery and cigars. Their shares were instantaneously
subscribed for, and directors nominated, with names and titles longer
even than the lines, and the smallest contributions in cash were
thankfully accepted:--

    “L’argent dans une bourse entre agréablement;
     Mais le terme venu, quand il faut le rendre,
     C’est alors que les douleurs commencent à nous prendre.”

[Sidenote: ANGLO-HISPANO RAILROADS.]

When the period for booking up, for making the first instalments,
arrived, the Spanish shareholders were found somewhat wanting: they
repudiated; for in the Peninsula it has long been easier to promise than
to pay. Again, on the only line which seems likely to be carried out at
present, that of Madrid to Aranjuez, the first step taken by them was to
dismiss all English engineers and _navvies_, on the plea of encouraging
native talent and industry rather than the foreigner. Many of the
English home proceedings would border on the ridiculous, were not the
laugh of some speculators rather on the wrong side. The City capitalists
certainly have our pity, and if their plethora of wealth required the
relief of bleeding, it could not be better performed than by a Spanish
_Sangrado_. How different some of the windings-up, the final reports, to
the magnificent beginnings and grandiloquent prospectuses put forth as
baits for John Bull, who hoped to be tossed at once, or elevated, from
haberdashery to a throne, by being offered a “potentiality of getting
rich beyond the dreams of avarice!” Thus, to clench assertion by
example, the London directors of the Royal Valencia Company made known
by an advertisement only last July, that they merely required
240,000,000 reals to connect the seaport of Valencia--where there is
none--to the capital Madrid, with 800,000 inhabitants,--there not being
200,000. One brief passage alone seemed ominous in the lucid array of
prospective profit--“The line has not yet been minutely surveyed;” this
might have suggested to the noble Marquis whose attractive name heads
the provisional committee list, the difficulty of Sterne’s traveller, of
whom, when observing how much better things were managed on the
Continent than in England, the question was asked, “Have you, sir, ever
been there?”

[Sidenote: LONDON RAILROAD MEETINGS.]

A still wilder scheme was broached, to connect Aviles on the Atlantic
with Madrid, the Asturian Alps and the Guadarrama mountains to the
contrary notwithstanding. The originator of this ingenious idea was to
receive 40,000_l._ for the cession of his plan to the company, and
actually did receive 25,000_l._, which, considering the difficulties,
natural and otherwise, must be considered an inadequate remuneration.
Although the original and captivating prospectus stated “_that the line
had been surveyed, and presented no engineering difficulties_,” it was
subsequently thought prudent to obtain some notion of the actual
localities, and Sir _Joshua_ Walmsley was sent forth with competent
assistance to spy out the land, which the Jewish practice of old was
rather to do before than after serious undertakings. A sad change soon
came over the spirit of the London dream by the discovery that a country
which looked level as Arrowsmith’s map in the prospectus, presented such
trifling obstacles to the rail as sundry leagues of mountain ridges,
which range from 6000 to 9000 feet high, and are covered with snow for
many months of the year. This was a damper. The report of the special
meeting (see ‘Morning Chronicle,’ Dec. 18, 1845) should be printed in
letters of gold, from the quantity of that article which it will
preserve to our credulous countrymen. Then and there the chairman
observed, with equal _naïveté_ and pathos, “that had he known as much
before as he did now, he would have been the last man to carry out a
railway in Spain.” This experience cost him, he observed, 5000_l._,
which is paying dear for a Spanish rail whistle. He might for five
pounds have bought the works of Townshend and Captain Cook: our modesty
prevents the naming another red book, in which these precise localities,
these mighty Alps, are described by persons who had ridden, or rather
soared, over them. At another meeting of another Spanish rail company,
held at the London Tavern, October 20, 1846, another chairman announced
“a fact of which he was not before aware, that it was impossible to
surmount the Pyrenees.” Meanwhile, the Madrid government had secured
30,000_l._ from them by way of _caution_ money; but caution disappears
from our capitalists, whenever excess of cash mounts from their pockets
into their heads; loss of common sense and dollars is the natural
result. But it is the fate of Spain and her things, to be judged of by
those who have never been there, and who feel no shame at the indecency
of the nakedness of their geographical ignorance. When the blind lead
the blind, beware of hillocks and ditches.

[Sidenote: POST-OFFICE.]




CHAPTER VI.

     Post-Office in Spain--Travelling with post-horses--Riding
     post--Mails and Diligences, Galeras, Coches de Colleras, Drivers,
     and Manner of Driving, and Oaths.


A system of post, both for the despatch of letters and the conveyance of
couriers, was introduced into Spain under Philip and Juana, that is,
towards the end of the reign of our Henry VII.; whereas it was scarcely
organised in England before the government of Cromwell. Spain, which in
these matters, as well as in many others, was once so much in advance,
is now compelled to borrow her improvements from those nations of which
she formerly was the instructress: among these may be reckoned all
travelling in carriages, whether public or private.

The post-office for letters is arranged on the plan common to most
countries on the Continent: the delivery is pretty regular, but seldom
daily--twice or three times a-week. Small scruple is made by the
authorities in opening private letters, whenever they suspect the
character of the correspondence. It is as well, therefore, for the
traveller to avoid expressing the whole of his opinions of the powers
that be. The minds of men have been long troubled in Spain; civil war
has rendered them very distrustful and guarded in their _written_
correspondence--“_carta canta_,” “a letter speaks.”

There is the usual continental bother in obtaining post-horses, which
results from their being a monopoly of government. There must be a
passport, an official order, notice of departure, &c.; next ensue
vexatious regulations in regard to the number of passengers, horses,
luggage, style of carriage, and so forth. These, and other spokes put
into the wheel, appear to have been invented by clerks who sit at home
devising how to impede rather than facilitate posting at all.

[Sidenote: PUBLIC CONVEYANCES.]

Post-horses and mules are paid at the rate of seven reals each for each
post. The Spanish postilions generally, and especially if well paid,
drive at a tremendous pace, often amounting to a gallop; nor are they
easily stopped, even if the traveller desires it--they seem only to be
intent on arriving at their stages’ end, in order to indulge in the
great national joy of then doing nothing: to get there, they heed
neither ruts nor ravines; and when once their cattle are started the
inside passenger feels like a kettle tied to the tail of a mad dog, or a
comet; the wild beasts think no more of him than if he were Mazeppa:
thus money makes the mare and its driver to go, as surely in Spain as in
all other countries.

Another mode of travelling is by riding post, accompanied by a mounted
postilion, who is changed with the cattle at each relay. It is an
expeditious but fatiguing plan; yet one which, like the Tartar courier
of the East, has long prevailed in Spain. Thus our Charles I. rode to
Madrid under the name of John Smith, by which he was not likely to be
identified. The delight of Philip II., who boasted that he governed the
world from the Escorial, was to receive frequent and early intelligence;
and this desire to hear something new is still characteristic of the
Spanish government. The cabinet-couriers have the preference of horses
at every relay. The particular distances they have to perform are all
timed, and so many leagues are required to be done in a fixed time; and,
in order to encourage despatch, for every hour gained on the allowed
time, an additional sum was paid to them: hence the common expression
“_ganando horas_” gaining hours--equivalent to our old “post
haste--haste for your life.”

[Sidenote: DILIGENCES.]

[Sidenote: EXPENSES ON THE ROAD.]

The usual mode of travelling for the affluent is in the public
conveyances, which are the fashion from being novelties and only
introduced under Ferdinand VII.; previously to their being allowed at
all, serious objections were started, similar to those raised by his
late Holiness to the introduction of railways into the papal states; it
was said that these tramontane facilities would bring in foreigners, and
with them philosophy, heresy, and innovations, by which the wisdom of
Spain’s ancestors might be upset. These scruples were ingeniously got
over by bribing the monarch with a large share of the profits. Now that
the royal monopoly is broken down, many new and competing companies have
sprung up; this mode of travelling is the cheapest and safest, nor is
it thought at all beneath the dignity of “the best set,” nay royalty
itself goes by the coach. Thus the Infante Don Francisco de Paula
constantly hires the whole of the diligence to convey himself and his
family from Madrid to the sea-coast; and one reason gravely given for
Don Enrique’s not coming to marry the Queen, was that his Royal Highness
could not get a place, as the dilly was booked full. The public
carriages of Spain are quite as good as those of France, and the company
who travel in them generally more respectable and better bred. This is
partly accounted for by the expense: the fares are not very high, yet
still form a serious item to the bulk of Spaniards; consequently those
who travel in the public carriages in Spain are the class who would in
other countries travel per post. It must, however, be admitted that all
travelling in the public conveyances of the Continent necessarily
implies great discomfort to those accustomed to their own carriages; and
with every possible precaution the long journeys in Spain, of three to
five hundred miles at a stretch, are such as few English ladies can
undergo, and are, even with men, undertakings rather of necessity than
of pleasure. The mail is organized on the plan of the French
malle-poste, and offers, to those who can stand the bumping, shaking,
and churning of continued and rapid travelling without halting, a means
of locomotion which leaves nothing to be desired. The diligences also
are imitations of the lumbering French model. It will be in vain to
expect in them the neatness, the well-appointed turn-out, the quiet,
time-keeping, and infinite facilities of the English original. These
matters when passed across the water are modified to the heroic
Continental contempt for doing things in style; cheapness, which is
their great principle, prefers rope-traces to those of leather, and a
carter to a regular coachman; the usual foreign drags also exist, which
render their slow coaches and bureaucratic absurdities so hateful to
free Britons; but when one is once booked and handed over to the
conductor, you arrive in due time at the journey’s end. The “guards” are
realities; they consist of stout, armed, most picturesque, robber-like
men and no mistake, since many, before they were pardoned and pensioned,
have frequently taken a purse on the Queen’s highway; for the foreground
of your first sketch, they are splendid fellows, and worth a score of
marshals. They are provided with a complete arsenal of swords and
blunderbusses, so that the cumbrous machine rolling over the sea of
plains looks like a man-of-war, and has been compared to a marching
citadel. Again in suspicious localities a mounted escort of equally
suspicious look gallops alongside, nor is the primitive practice of
black mail altogether neglected: the consequence of these admirable
precautions is, that the diligences are seldom or never robbed; the
thing, however, is possible.

The whole of this garrisoned Noah’s ark is placed under the command of
the _Mayoral_ or conductor, who like all Spanish men in authority is a
despot, and yet, like them, is open to the conciliatory influences of a
bribe. He regulates the hours of toil and sleep, which latter--blessings,
says Sancho, on the man who invented it!--is uncertain, and depends on
the early or late arrival of the diligence and the state of the roads,
for all that is lost of the fixed time on the road is made up for by
curtailing the time allowed for repose. One of the many good effects of
setting up diligences is the bettering the inns on the road; and it is a
safe and general rule to travellers in Spain, whatever be their vehicle,
always to inquire in every town which is the _posada_ that the diligence
stops at. Persons were dispatched from Madrid to the different stations
on the great lines, to fit up houses, bed-rooms, and kitchens, and
provide everything for table, service; cooks were sent round to teach
the innkeepers to set out and prepare a proper dinner and supper. Thus,
in villages in which a few years before the use of a fork was scarcely
known, a table was laid out, clean, well served, and abundant. The
example set by the diligence inns has produced a beneficial effect,
since they offer a model, create competition, and suggest the existence
of many comforts, which were hitherto unknown among Spaniards, whose
abnegation of material enjoyments at home, and praiseworthy endurance of
privations of all kinds on journeys, are quite Oriental.

[Sidenote: BEDS FOR TRAVELLERS.]

In some of the new companies every expense is calculated in the fare, to
wit, journey, postilions, inns, &c., which is very convenient to the
stranger, and prevents the loss of much money and temper. A chapter on
the dilly is as much a standing dish in every Peninsular tour as a
bullfight or a bandit adventure, for which there is a continual demand
in the home-market; and no doubt in the long distances of Spain, where
men and women are boxed up for three or four mortal days together (the
nights not being omitted), the plot thickens, and opportunity is
afforded to appreciate costume and character; the farce or tragedy may
be spun out into as many acts as the journey takes days. In general the
order of the course is as follows: the breakfast consists at early dawn
of a cup of good stiff chocolate, which being the favourite drink of the
church and allowable even on fast days, is as nutritious as delicious.
It is accompanied by a bit of roasted or fried bread, and is followed by
a glass of cold water, to drink which is an axiom with all wise men who
respect the efficient condition of their livers. After rumbling on, over
a given number of leagues, when the passengers get well shaken together
and hungry, a regular knife and fork breakfast is provided that closely
resembles the dinner or supper which is served up later in the evening;
the table is plentiful, and the cookery to those who like oil and garlic
excellent. Those who do not, can always fall back on the bread and eggs,
which are capital; the wine is occasionally like purple blacking, and
sometimes serves also as vinegar for the salad, as the oil is said to be
used indifferently for lamps or stews; a bad dinner, especially if the
bill be long, and the wine sour, does not sweeten the passengers’
tempers; they become quarrelsome, and if they have the good luck, a
little robber skirmish gives vent to ill-humour.

[Sidenote: THE GALERA.]

At nightfall after supper, a few hours are allowed on your part to steal
whatever rest the _mayoral_ and certain _voltigeurs_, creeping and
winged, will permit; the beds are plain and clean; sometimes the
mattresses may be compared to sacks of walnuts, but there is no pillow
so soft as fatigue; the beds are generally arranged in twos, threes, and
fours, according to the size of the room. The traveller should
immediately on arriving secure his, and see that it is comfortable, for
those who neglect to get a good one must sleep in a bad. Generally
speaking, by a little management, he may get a room to himself, or at
least select his companions. There is, moreover, a real civility and
politeness shown by all classes of Spaniards, on all occasions, towards
strangers and ladies; and that even failing, a small tip, “_una
gratificacioncita_,” given beforehand to the maid, or the waiter, seldom
fails to smooth all difficulties. On these, as on all occasions in
Spain, most things may be obtained by good humour, a smile, a joke, a
proverb, a cigar, or a bribe, which, though last, is by no means the
least resource, since it will be found to mollify the hardest heart and
smooth the greatest difficulties, after civil speeches had been tried in
vain, for _Dadivas quebrantan peñas, y entra sin barrenas_, gifts break
rocks, and penetrate without gimlets; again, _Mas ablanda dinero que
palabras de Caballero_, cash softens more than a gentleman’s palaver.
The mode of driving in Spain, which is so unlike our way of handling the
ribbons, will be described presently.

Means of conveyance for those who cannot afford the diligence are
provided by vehicles of more genuine Spanish nature and discomfort; they
may be compared to the neat accommodation for man and beast which is
doled out to third-class passengers by our monopolist railway kings, who
have usurped her Majesty’s highway, and fleece her lieges by virtue of
act of Parliament.

First and foremost comes the _galera_, which fully justifies its name;
and even those who have no value for their time or bones will, after a
short trial of the rack and dislocation, exclaim,--“_que diable
allais-je faire dans cette galère?_” These machines travel periodically
from town to town, and form the chief public and carrier communication
between most provincial cities; they are not much changed from that
classical cart, the _rheda_, into which, as we read in Juvenal, the
whole family of Fabricius was conveyed. In Spain these primitive
locomotives have stood still in the general advance of this age of
progress, and carry us back to our James I., and Fynes Moryson’s
accounts of “carryers who have long covered waggons, in which they carry
passengers from city to city; but this kind of journeying is so tedious,
by reason they must take waggons very early and come very late to their
innes, none but women and people of inferior condition used to travel in
this sort.” So it is now in Spain.

[Sidenote: CARRIAGES AND CARTS.]

This _galera_ is a long cart without springs; the sides are lined with
matting, while beneath hangs a loose open net, as under the calesinas of
Naples, in which lies and barks a horrid dog, who keeps a Cerberus watch
over iron pots and sieves, and such like gipsey utensils, and who is
never to be conciliated. These _galeras_ are of all sizes; but if a
_galera_ should be a larger sort of vehicle than is wanted, then a
“_tartana_” a sort of covered tilted cart, which is very common in
Valencia, and which is so called from a small Mediterranean craft of the
same name, will be found convenient.

The packing and departure of the _galera_, when hired by a family who
remove their goods, is a thing of Spain; the heavy luggage is stowed in
first, and beds and mattresses spread on the top, on which the family
repose in admired disorder. The _galera_ is much used by the “poor
students” of Spain, a class unique of its kind, and full of rags and
impudence; their adventures have the credit of being rich and
picturesque, and recall some of the accounts of “waggon incidents” in
‘Roderick Random,’ and Smollett’s novels.

Civilization, as connected with the wheel, is still at a low ebb in
Spain, notwithstanding the numerous political revolutions. Except in a
few great towns, the quiz vehicles remind us of those caricatures at
which one laughed so heartily in Paris in 1814; and in Madrid, even down
to Ferdinand VII.’s decease, the _Prado_--its rotten row--was filled
with antediluvian carriages--grotesque coachmen and footmen to match,
which with us would be put into the British Museum; they are now, alas
for painters and authors! worn out, and replaced by poor French
imitations of good English originals.

[Sidenote: THE COCHE DE COLLERAS.]

As the genuine older Spanish ones were built in remote ages, and before
the invention of folding steps, the ascent and descent were facilitated
by a three-legged footstool, which dangled, strapped up near the door,
as appears in the hieroglyphics of Egypt 4000 years ago; a pair of
long-eared fat mules, with hides and tails fantastically cut, was driven
by a superannuated postilion in formidable jackboots, and not less
formidable cocked hat of oil-cloth. In these, how often have we seen
Spanish grandees with pedigrees as old-fashioned, gravely taking the air
and dust! These slow coaches of old Spain have been rapidly sketched by
the clever young American; such are the ups and downs of nations and
vehicles. Spain for having discovered America has in return become her
butt; she cannot go a-head; so the great dust of Alexander may stop a
bung-hole, and we too join in the laugh and forget that our
ancestors--see Beaumont and Fletcher’s ‘Maid of the Inn’--talked of
“_hurrying_ on featherbeds that move upon four-wheel Spanish
_caroches_.”

While on these wheel subjects it may be observed that the carts and
other machines of Spanish rural locomotion and husbandry have not
escaped better; when not Oriental they are Roman; rude in form and
material, they are always odd, picturesque, and inconvenient. The
peasant, for the most part, scratches the earth with a plough modelled
after that invented by Triptolemus, beats out his corn as described by
Homer, and carries his harvest home in strict obedience to the rules in
the Georgics. The iron work is iniquitous, but both sides of the
Pyrenees are centuries behind England; there, absurd tariffs prohibit
the importation of our cheap and good work in order to encourage their
own bad and dear wares--thus poverty and ignorance are perpetuated.

The carts in the north-west provinces are the unchanged _plaustra_, with
solid wheels, the Roman _tympana_ which consist of mere circles of wood,
without spokes or axles, much like mill-stones or Parmesan cheeses, and
precisely such as the old Egyptians used, as is seen in hieroglyphics,
and no doubt much resembling those sent by Joseph for his father, which
are still used by the Affghans and other unadvanced coachmakers. The
whole wheel turns round together with a piteous creaking; the drivers,
whose leathern ears are as blunt as their edgeless teeth, delight in
this excruciating _Chirrio_, Arabicè _charrar_, to make a _noise_, which
they call music, and delight in, because it is cheap and plays to them
of itself; they, moreover, think it frightens wolves, bears, and the
devil himself, as Don Quixote says, which it well may, for the wheel of
Ixion, although damned in hell, never whined more piteously. The doleful
sounds, however, serve like our waggoners’ lively bells, as warnings to
other drivers, who, in narrow paths and gorges of rocks, where two
carriages cannot pass, have this notice given them, and draw aside until
the coast is clear.

We have reserved some details and the mode of driving for the _coche de
colleras_, the _caroche_ of horse-collars, which is the real coach of
Spain, and in which we have made many a pleasant trip; it too is doomed
to be scheduled away, for Spaniards are descending from these coaches
and six to a chariot and pair, and by degrees beautifully less, to a
fly.

[Sidenote: THE COCHE DE COLLERAS.]

Mails and diligences, we have said, are only established on the
principal high roads connected with Madrid: there are but few local
coaches which run from one provincial town to another, where the
necessity of frequent and certain intercommunication is little called
for. In the other provinces, where these modern conveniences have not
been introduced, the earlier mode of travelling is the only resource
left to families of children, women, and invalids, who are unable to
perform the journey on horseback. This is the _festina lentè_, or
voiturier system; and from its long continuance in Italy and Spain, in
spite of all the improvements adopted in other countries, it would
appear to have something congenial and peculiarly fitted to the habits
and wants of those cognate nations of the south, who have a
Gotho-Oriental dislike to be hurried--_no corre priesa_, there is plenty
of time. _Sie haben zeit genug._

[Sidenote: THE MAYORAL.]

The Spanish vetturino, or “_Calesero_,” is to be found, as in Italy,
standing for hire in particular and well-known places in every principal
town. There is not much necessity for hunting for _him_; he has the
Italian instinctive perception of a stranger and traveller, and the same
importunity in volunteering himself, his cattle, and carriage, for any
part of Spain. The man, however, and his equipage are peculiarly
Spanish; his carriage and his team have undergone little change during
the last two centuries, and are the representatives of the former ones
of Europe; they resemble those vehicles once used in England, which may
still be seen in the old prints of country-houses by Kip; or, as regards
France, in the pictures of Louis XIV.’s journeys and campaigns by
Vandermeulen. They are the remnant of the once universal “coach and
six,” in which according to Pope, who was not infallible, British fair
were to delight for ever. The “_coche de colleras_” is a huge cumbrous
machine, built after the fashion of a reduced lord mayor’s coach, or
some of the equipages of the old cardinals at Rome. It is ornamented
with rude sculpture, gilding, and painting of glaring colour, but the
modern pea-jacket and round hat spoil the picture which requires
passengers dressed in brocade and full-bottomed wigs; the fore-wheels
are very low, the hind ones very high, and both remarkably narrow in the
tire; remember when they stick in the mud, and the drivers call upon
Santiago, to push the vehicle out _backwards_, as the more you draw it
forwards the deeper you get into the mire. The pole sticks out like the
bowsprit of a ship, and contains as much wood and iron work as would go
to a small waggon. The interior is lined with gay silk and gaudy plush,
adorned with lace and embroidery, with doors that open indifferently and
windows that do not shut well; latterly the general poverty and _prose_
of transpyrenean civilization has effaced much of these ornate
nationalities, both in coach and drivers; better roads and lighter
vehicles require fewer horses, which were absolutely necessary formerly
to drag the heavy concern through heavier ways.

[Sidenote: THE ZAGAL.]

[Sidenote: DRIVING IN SPAIN.]

The luggage is piled up behind, or stowed away in a front boot. The
management of driving this vehicle is conducted by two persons. The
master is called the “_mayoral_;” his helper or cad the “_mozo_,” or,
more properly, “_el zagal_,” from the Arabic, “a strong active youth.”
The costume is peculiar, and is based on that of Andalucia, which sets
the fashion all over the Peninsula, in all matters regarding
bull-fighting, horse-dealing, robbing, smuggling, and so forth. He wears
on his head a gay-coloured silk handkerchief, tied in such a manner that
the tails hang down behind; over this remnant of the Moorish turban he
places a high-peaked sugarloaf-shaped hat with broad brims; his jaunty
jacket is made either of black sheepskin, studded with silver tags and
filigree buttons, or of brown cloth, with the back, arms, and
particularly the elbows, welted and tricked out with flowers and vases,
cut in patches of different-coloured cloth and much embroidered. When
the jacket is not worn, it is usually hung over the left shoulder, after
the hussar fashion. The waistcoat is made of rich fancy silk; the
breeches of blue or green velvet plush, ornamented with stripes and
filigree buttons, and tied at the knee with silken cords and tassels;
the neck is left open, and the shirt collar turned down, and a gaudy
neck-handkerchief is worn, oftener passed through a ring than tied in a
knot; his waist is girt with a red sash, or with one of a bright yellow.
This “_faja_,"[3] a _sine quâ non_, is the old Roman zona; it serves
also for a purse, “girds the loins,” and keeps up a warmth over the
abdomen, which is highly beneficial in hot climates, and wards off any
tendency to irritable colic; in the sash is stuck the “_navaja_,” the
knife, which is part and parcel of a Spaniard, and behind the “_zagal_”
usually places his stick. The richly embroidered gaiters are left open
at the outside to show a handsome stocking; the shoes are yellow, like
those of our cricketers, and are generally made of untanned calfskin,
which being the colour of dust require no cleaning. The _caleseros_ on
the eastern coast wear the Valencian stocking, which has no feet to
it--being open at bottom, it is likened by wags to a Spaniard’s purse;
instead of top boots they wear the ancient Roman sandals, made of the
_esparto_ rush, with hempen soles, which are called “_alpargatas_,”
Arabicè _Alpalgah_. The “_zagal_” follows the fashion in dress of the
“_mayoral_,” as nearly as his means will permit him. He is the servant
of all-work, and must be ready on every occasion; nor can any one who
has ever seen the hard and incessant toil which these men undergo,
justly accuse them of being indolent--a reproach which has been cast
somewhat indiscriminately on all the lower classes of Spain; he runs by
the side of the carriage, picks up stones to pelt the mules, ties and
unties knots, and pours forth a volley of blows and oaths from the
moment of starting to that of arrival. He sometimes is indulged with a
ride by the side of the mayoral on the box, when he always uses the tail
of the hind mule to pull himself up into his seat. The harnessing the
six animals is a difficult operation; first the tackle of ropes is laid
out on the ground, then each beast is brought into his portion of the
rigging. The start is always an important ceremony, and, as our royal
mail used to do in the country, brings out all the idlers in the
vicinity. When the team is harnessed, the mayoral gets all his skeins of
ropes into his hand, the “_zagal_” his sash full of stones, the helpers
at the venta their sticks; at a given signal all fire a volley of oaths
and blows at the team, which, once in motion, away it goes, pitching
over ruts deep as routine prejudices, with its pole dipping and rising
like a ship in a rolling sea, and continues at a brisk pace, performing
from twenty-five to thirty miles a-day. The hours of starting are early,
in order to avoid the mid-day heat; in these matters the Spanish customs
are pretty much the same with the Italian; the _calesero_ is always the
best judge of the hours of departure and these minor details, which vary
according to circumstances.

Whenever a particularly bad bit of road occurs, notice is given to the
team by calling over their names, and by crying out “_arré, arré_,”
gee-up, which is varied with “_firmé, firmé_,” steady, boy, steady! The
names of the animals are always fine-sounding and polysyllabic; the
accent is laid on the last syllable, which is always dwelt on and
lengthened out with a particular
emphasis--_Căpĭtănā-ā_--_Băndŏlĕrā-ā_--_Gĕnĕrălā-ā_--_Vălĕrŏsā-ā_.
All this vocal driving is performed at the top of the voice, and,
indeed, next to scaring away crows in a field, must be considered the
best possible practice for the lungs. The team often exceeds six in
number, and never is less; the proportion of females predominates: there
is generally one male mule making the seventh, who is called “_el
macho_,” the male par excellence, like the Grand Turk, or a substantive
in a speech in Cortes, which seldom has less than half a dozen epithets:
he invariably comes in for the largest share of abuse and ill usage,
which, indeed, he deserves the most, as the male mule is infinitely more
stubborn and viciously inclined than the female. Sometimes there is a
horse of the Rosinante breed; he is called “_el cavallo_,” or rather, as
it is pronounced, “_el căvăl yō-ō_.” The horse is always the
best used of the team; to be a rider, “_caballero_,” is the Spaniard’s
synonym for gentleman; and it is their correct mode of addressing each
other, and is banded gravely among the lower orders, who never have
crossed any quadruped save a mule or a jackass.

[Sidenote: SWEARING.]

The driving a _coche de colleras_ is quite a science of itself, and is
observed in conducting _diligences_; it amuses the Spanish “_majo_” or
fancy-man as much as coach-driving does the fancy-man of England; the
great art lies not in handling the ribbons, but in the proper modulation
of the voice, since the cattle are always addressed individually by
their names; the first syllables are pronounced very rapidly; the
“_macho_,” the male mule, who is the most abused, is the only one who is
not addressed by any names beyond that of his sex: the word is repeated
with a voluble iteration; in order to make the two syllables longer,
they are strung together thus, _măchŏ--măchŏ--măchŏ--măcho-ŏ_: they begin in
semiquavers, flowing on crescendo to a semibreve or breve, so the four
words are compounded into one polysyllable. The horse, _caballo_, is
simply called so; he has no particular name of his own, which the female
mules are never without, and which they perfectly know--indeed, the
owners will say that they understand them, and all bad language, as well
as Christian women, “_como Cristianas_;” and, to do the beasts justice,
they seem more shocked and discomfited thereby than the bipeds who
profess the same creed. If the animal called to does not answer by
pricking up her ears, or by quickening her pace, the threat of “_lă
vărā_,” the stick, is added--the last argument of Spanish drivers,
men in office, and schoolmasters, with whom there is no sort of reason
equal to that of the bastinado, “_no hay tal razon, como la del
baston_.” It operates on the timorous more than “unadorned eloquence.”
The Moors thought so highly of the bastinado, that they held the stick
to be a special gift from Allah to the faithful. It holds good, _à
priori_ and _à posteriori_, to mule and boy, “_al hijo y mulo, para el
culo_;” and if the “_macho_” be in fault, and he is generally punished
to encourage the others, some abuse is added to blows, such as “_que
pĕrrō-ō_,” “what a dog!” or some unhandsome allusion to his
mother, which is followed by throwing a stone at the leaders, for no
whip could reach them from the coach-box. When any particular mule’s
name is called, if her companion be the next one to be abused, she is
seldom addressed by her name, but is spoken to as “_a la
ŏtrā-ā_,” “_aquella ŏtrā-ā_,” “Now for that other
one,” which from long association is expected and acknowledged. The team
obeys the voice and is in admirable command. Few things are more
entertaining than driving them, especially over bad roads; but it
requires much practice in Spanish speaking and swearing.

[Sidenote: SPANISH OATHS.]

[Sidenote: HINTS FOR HIRING.]

Among the many commandments that are always broken in Spain, that of
“swear not at all” is not the least. “Our army swore lustily in
Flanders,” said Uncle Toby. But few nations can surpass the Spaniards in
the language of vituperation: it is limited only by the extent of their
anatomical, geographical, astronomical, and religious knowledge; it is
so plentifully bestowed on their animals--“un muletier à ce jeu vaut
trois rois”--that oaths and imprecations seem to be considered as the
only language the mute creation can comprehend; and as actions are
generally suited to the words, the combination is remarkably effective.
As much of the traveller’s time on the road must be passed among beasts
and muleteers, who are not unlike them, some knowledge of their sayings
and doings is of great use: to be able to talk to them in their own
lingo, to take an interest in them and in their animals, never fails to
please; “_Por vida del demonio, mas sabe Usia que nosotros_;” “by the
life of the devil, your honour knows more than we,” is a common form of
compliment. When once equality is established, the master mind soon
becomes the real master of the rest. The great oath of Spain, which
ought never to be written or pronounced, practically forms the
foundation of the language of the lower orders; it is a most ancient
remnant of the phallic abjuration of the evil eye, the dreaded
fascination which still perplexes the minds of Orientals, and is not
banished from Spanish and Neapolitan superstitions.[4] The word
terminates in _ajo_, on which great stress is laid: the _j_ is
pronounced with a most Arabic, guttural aspiration. The word _ajo_ means
also garlic, which is quite as often in Spanish mouths, and is exactly
what Hotspur liked, a “mouth-filling oath,” energetic and Michael
Angelesque. The pun has been extended to onions: thus, “_ajos y
cebollas_” means oaths and imprecations. The sting of the oath is in the
“_ajo_;” all women and quiet men, who do not wish to be particularly
objurgatory, but merely to enforce and give a little additional vigour,
un soupçon d’ail, or a shotting to their discourse, drop the offensive
“_ajo_,” and say “_car_,” “_carai_,” “_caramba_.” The Spanish oath is
used as a verb, as a substantive, as an adjective, just as it suits the
grammar or the wrath of the utterer. It is equivalent also to a certain
place and the person who lives there. “_Vaya Usted al C--ajo_” is the
worst form of the angry “_Vaya Usted al demonio_,” or “_á los
infiernos_,” and is a whimsical mixture of courtesy and transportation.
“Your Grace may go to the devil, or to the infernal regions!”

Thus these imprecatory vegetables retain in Spain their old Egyptian
flavour and mystical charm; as on the Nile, according to Pliny, onions
and garlic were worshipped as adjuratory divinities. The Spaniards have
also added most of the gloomy northern Gothic oaths, which are
imprecatory, to the Oriental, which are grossly sensual. Enough of this.
The traveller who has much to do with Spanish mules and asses, biped or
quadruped, will need no hand-book to teach him the sixty-five or more
“_serments espaignols_” on which Mons. de Brantome wrote a treatise.
More becoming will it be to the English gentleman to swear not at all; a
reasonable indulgence in _Caramba_ is all that can be permitted; the
custom is more honoured in the breach than in the observance, and bad
luck seldom deserts the house of the imprecator. “_En la casa del que
jura, no falta desaventura._”

[Sidenote: HINTS FOR HIRING.]

Previously to hiring one of these “coaches of collars,” which is rather
an expensive amusement, every possible precaution should be taken in
clearly and minutely specifying everything to be done, and the price;
the Spanish “_caleseros_” rival their Italian colleagues in that
untruth, roguery, and dishonesty, which seem everywhere to combine
readily with jockeyship, and distinguishes those who handle the whip,
“do jobbings,” and conduct mortals by horses; the fee to be given to the
drivers should never be included in the bargain, as the keeping this
important item open and dependent on the good behaviour of the future
recipients offers a sure check over master and man, and other
road-classes. In justice, however, to this class of Spaniards, it may be
said that on the whole they are civil, good-humoured, and hard-working,
and, from not having been accustomed to either the screw bargaining or
alternate extravagance of the English travellers in Italy, are as
tolerably fair in their transactions as can be expected from human
nature brought in constant contact with four-legged and four-wheeled
temptations. They offer to the artist an endless subject of the
picturesque; everything connected with them is full of form, colour, and
originality. They can do nothing, whether sitting, driving, sleeping,
or eating, that does not make a picture; the same may be said of their
animals and their habits and harness; those who draw will never find the
midday halt long enough for the infinite variety of subject and scenery
to which their travelling equipage and attendants form the most peculiar
and appropriate foreground: while our modern poetasters will consider
them quite as worthy of being sung in immortal verse as the Cambridge
carrier Hobson, who was Milton’s choice.

[Sidenote: THE ANDALUCIAN HORSE.]




CHAPTER VII.

     Spanish Horses--Mules--Asses--Muleteers--Maragatos.


We now proceed to Spanish quadrupeds, having placed the wheel-carriages
before the horses. That of Andalucia takes precedence of all; he fetches
the highest price, and the Spaniards in general value no other breed;
they consider his configuration and qualities as perfect, and in some
respects they are right, for no horse is more elegant or more easy in
his motions, none are more gentle or docile, none are more quick in
acquiring showy accomplishments, or in performing feats of Astleyan
agility; he has very little in common with the English blood-horse; his
mane is soft and silky, and is frequently plaited with gay ribbons; his
tail is of great length, and left in all the proportions of nature, not
cropped and docked, by which Voltaire was so much offended:--

    “Fiers et bizarres Anglais, qui des mêmes ciseaux
     Coupez la tête aux rois, et la queue aux chevaux.”

[Sidenote: OTHER SPANISH HORSES.]

It often trails to the very ground, while the animal has perfect command
over it, lashing it on every side as a gentleman switches his cane;
therefore, when on a journey, it is usual to double and tie it up, after
the fashion of the ancient pig-tails of our sailors. The Andalucian
horse is round in his quarters, though inclined to be small in the
barrel; he is broad-chested, and always carries his head high,
especially when going a good pace; his length of leg adds to his height,
which sometimes reaches to sixteen hands; he never, however, stretches
out with the long graceful sweep of the English thorough-bred; his
action is apt to be loose and shambling, and he is given to _dishing_
with the feet. The pace is, notwithstanding, perfectly delightful. From
being very long in the pastern, the motion is broken as it were by the
springs of a carriage; their pace is the peculiar “_paso Castellano_,”
which is something more than a walk, and less than a trot, and it is
truly sedate and sedan-chair-like, and suits a grave Don, who is given,
like a Turk, to tobacco and contemplation. Those Andalucian horses which
fall when young into the hands of the officers at Gibraltar acquire a
very different action, and lay themselves better down to their work, and
gain much more in speed from the English system of training than they
would have done had they been managed by Spaniards. Taught or untaught,
this _pace_ is most gentlemanlike, and well did Beaumont and Fletcher

    “Think it noble, as Spaniards do in riding,
     In managing a great horse, which is princely;”

and as has been said, is the only attitude in which the kings of the
Spains, true Φιλιπποι, ought ever to be painted, witching the
world with noble horsemanship.

Many other provinces possess breeds which are more useful, though far
less showy, than the Andalucian. The horse of Castile is a strong, hardy
animal, and the best which Spain produces for mounting heavy cavalry.
The ponies of Gallicia, although ugly and uncouth, are admirably suited
to the wild hilly country and laborious population; they require very
little care or grooming, and are satisfied with coarse food and Indian
corn. The horses of Navarre, once so celebrated, are still esteemed for
their hardy strength; they have, from neglect, degenerated into ponies,
which, however, are beautiful in form, hardy, docile, sure-footed, and
excellent trotters. In most of the large towns of Spain there is a sort
of market, where horses are publicly sold; but Ronda fair, in May, is
the great Howden and Horncastle of the four provinces of Seville,
Cordova, Jaen, and Granada, and the resort of all the picturesque-looking
rogues of the south. The reader of Don Quixote need not be told that the
race of Gines Passamonte is not extinct; the Spanish _Chalanes_, or
horse-dealers, have considerable talents; but the cleverest is but a
mere child when compared to the perfection of rascality to which a real
English professor has attained in the mysteries of lying, chaunting, and
making up a horse.

[Sidenote: MULES.]

The breeding of horses was carefully attended to by the Spanish
government previously to the invasion of the French, by whom the entire
horses and brood-mares were either killed or stolen, and the buildings
and stables burnt.

The saddles used commonly in Spain are Moorish; they are made with high
peak and croup behind; the stirrup-irons are large triangularly-shaped
boxes. The food is equally Oriental, and consists of “barley and straw,”
as mentioned in the Bible. We well remember the horror of our Andalucian
groom, on our first reaching Gallicia, when he rushed in, exclaiming
that the beasts would perish, as nothing was to be had there but oats
and hay. After some difficulty he was persuaded to see if they would eat
it, which to his surprise they actually did; such, however, is habit,
that they soon fell out of condition, and did not recover until the damp
mountains were quitted for the arid plains of Castile.

[Sidenote: ASSES.]

Spaniards in general prefer mules and asses to the horse, which is more
delicate, requires greater attention, and is less sure-footed over
broken and precipitous ground. The mule performs in Spain the functions
of the camel in the East, and has something in his morale (besides his
physical suitableness to the country) which is congenial to the
character of his masters; he has the same self-willed obstinacy, the
same resignation under burdens, the same singular capability of
endurance of labour, fatigue, and privation. The mule has always been
much used in Spain, and the demand for them very great; yet, from some
mistaken crotchet of Spanish political economy (which is very Spanish),
the breeding of the mule has long been attempted to be prevented, in
order to encourage that of the horse. One of the reasons alleged was,
that the mule was a non-reproductive animal; an argument which might or
ought to apply equally to the monk; a breed for which Spain could have
shown for the first prize, both as to number and size, against any other
country in all Christendom. This attempt to force the production of an
animal far less suited to the wants and habits of the people has failed,
as might be expected. The difficulties thrown in the way have only
tended to raise the prices of mules, which are, and always were, very
dear; a good mule will fetch from 25_l._ to 50_l._, while a horse of
relative goodness may be purchased for from 20_l._ to 40_l._ Mules were
always very dear; thus Martial, like a true Andalucian Spaniard, _talks_
of one which cost more than a house. The most esteemed are those bred
from the mare and the ass, or _"garañon"_[5] some of which are of
extraordinary size; and one which Don Carlos had in his stud-house at
Aranjuez in 1832 exceeded fifteen hands in height. This colossal ass and
a Spanish infante were worthy of each other.

The mules in Spain, as in the East, have their coats closely shorn or
clipped; part of the hair is usually left on in stripes like the zebra,
or cut into fanciful patterns, like the tattooings of a New Zealand
chief. This process of shearing is found to keep the beast cooler and
freer from cutaneous disorders. The operation is performed in the
southern provinces by gipsies, who are the same tinkers, horse-dealers,
and vagrants in Spain as elsewhere. Their clipping recalls the “mulo
curto,” on which Horace could amble even to Brundusium. The operators
rival in talent those worthy Frenchmen who cut the hair of poodles on
the Pont Neuf, in the heart and brain of European civilization. Their
Spanish colleagues may be known by the shears, formidable and
classical-shaped as those of Lachesis and her sisters, which they carry
in their sashes. They are very particular in clipping the heels and
pasterns, which they say ought to be as free from superfluous hair as
the palm of a lady’s hand.

Spanish asses have been immortalised by Cervantes; they are endeared to
us by Sancho’s love and talent of imitation; he brayed so well, be it
remembered, that all the long-eared chorus joined a performer who, in
his own modest phrase, only wanted a tail to be a perfect donkey.
Spanish mayors, according to Don Quixote, have a natural talent for this
braying; but, save and except in the west of England, their right
worshipfuls may be matched elsewhere.

[Sidenote: ASSES OF LA MANCHA.]

[Sidenote: THE MULETEER.]

The humble ass, “_burro_,” “_borrico_,” is the rule, the as in præsenti,
and part and parcel of every Spanish scene: he forms the appropriate
foreground in streets or roads. Wherever two or three Spaniards are
collected together in market, _junta_, or “congregation,” there is quite
sure to be an ass among them; he is the hardworked companion of the
lower orders, to whom to work is the greatest misfortune; sufferance is
indeed the common virtue of both tribes. They may, perhaps, both wince a
little when a new burden or a new tax is laid on them by Señor Mon, but
they soon, when they see that there is no remedy, bear on and endure:
from this fellow-feeling, master and animal cherish each other at heart,
though, from the blows and imprecations bestowed openly, the former may
be thought by hasty observers to be ashamed of confessing these
predilections in public. Some under-current, no doubt, remains of the
ancient prejudices of chivalry; but Cervantes, who thoroughly understood
human nature in general, and Spanish nature in particular, has most
justly dwelt on the dear love which Sancho Panza felt for his “_Rucio_,”
and marked the reciprocity of the brute, affectionate as intelligent. In
fact, in the _Sagra_ district, near Toledo, he is called _El vecino_,
one of the householders; and none can look a Spanish ass in the face
without remarking a peculiar expression, which indicates that the hairy
fool considers himself, like the pig in a cabin of the “first gem of the
sea,” to be one of the family, _de la familia_, or _de nosotros_. La
Mancha is the paradise of mules and asses; many a Sancho at this moment
is there fondling and embracing his ass, his “_chato chatito_,”
“_romo_,” or other complimentary variations of _Snub_, with which, when
not abusing him, he delights to nickname his helpmate. In Spain, as
Sappho says, Love is γλυκυπικρον, an alternation of the
agro-dolce; nor is there any Prevention of Cruelty Society towards
animals; every Spaniard has the same right in law and equity to kick and
beat his own ass to his own liking, as a philanthropical Yankee has to
wallop his own niggar; no one ever thinks of interposing on these
occasions, any more than they would in a quarrel between a man and his
wife. The _words_ are, at all events, on one side. It is, however,
recorded _in piam memoriam_, of certain Roman Catholic asses of Spain,
that they tried to throw off one Tomas Trebiño and some other heretics,
when on the way to be burnt, being horror-struck at bearing such
monsters. Every Spanish peasant is heart-broken when injury is done to
his ass, as well he may be, for it is the means by which he lives; nor
has he much chance, if he loses him, of finding a crown when hunting for
him, as was once done, or even a government like Sancho. Sterne would
have done better to have laid the venue of his sentimentalities over a
dead ass in Spain, rather than in France, where the quadruped species is
much rarer. In Spain, where small carts and wheel-barrows are almost
unknown, and the drawing them is considered as beneath the dignity of
the Spanish man, the substitute, an ass, is in constant employ;
sometimes it is laden with sacks of corn, with wine-skins, with
water-jars, with dung, or with dead robbers, slung like sacks over the
back, their arms and legs tied under the animal’s belly. Asses’ milk,
“_leche de burra_,” is in much request during the spring season. The
brown sex drink it in order to fine their complexions and cool their
blood, “_refrescar la sangre_;” the clergy and men in office, “_los
empleados_,” to whom it is mother’s milk, swallow it in order that it
may give tone to their gastric juices. Riding on assback was accounted a
disgrace and a degradation to the Gothic hidalgo, and the Spaniards, in
the sixteenth century, mounted unrepining cuckolds, “_los cornudos
pacientes_,” on asses. Now-a-days, in spite of all these unpleasant
