divides each line, or verse, into two equally accented parts. And the
half-lines can be further resolved into two halves, each containing a
single accented word or phrase. This is proved by tablet Spartali ii,
265A, where the scribe writes his lines and spaces the words in such a
way as to show the subdivision of the lines. Thus we have:--

  _enuma_   | _elish_  || _lâ nabû_| _shamamu_
  _shaplish_| _ammatum_|| _shuma_  | _lâ zakrat_

Here there is clearly a rhythm which resembles that found in the poems
of the Syrians and Arabs, but there are many instances of its
inconsistent use in several parts of the text.  Both rhyme and
alliteration appear to be used occasionally.




THE SEVEN TABLETS OF CREATION.--TRANSLATION.



FIRST TABLET.[1]

[Footnote 1: This translation is made from transcripts of the British
Museum fragments (_Cuneiform Texts_, Part XIII), and transcripts
of the Berlin fragments (Ebeling, _Keilschrifttexte aus Assur_,
Nos. 117, 118).]

1. When the heavens above were yet unnamed,[1]

[Footnote 1: The name of an object was the object itself, and it was
believed that nothing could exist apart from its name.]

2. And the name of the earth beneath had not been recorded,

3. Apsu, the oldest of beings, their progenitor,

4. "Mummu" Tiâmat, who bare each and all of them--

5. Their waters were merged into a single mass.

6. A field had not been measured, a marsh had not been searched out,

7. When of the gods none was shining,

[Illustration: Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text
of the First Tablet of the Creation Series. [K. 5419C.]]

8. A name had not been recorded, a fate had not been fixed,

9. The gods came into being in the midst of them.

10. The god Lakhmu and the goddess Lakhamu were made to shine, they
were named.

11. [Together] they increased in stature, they grew tall.

12. Anshar and Kishar came into being, and others besides them.

13. Long were the days, the years increased.

14. The god Anu, their son, the equal of his fathers, [was created].

15. The god Anshar made his eldest son Anu in his own image.

16. And the god Anu begat Nudimmud (Ea) the image of himself.

17. The god Nudimmud was the first among his fathers,

18. Endowed with understanding, he who thinketh deeply, the orator

19. Exceedingly mighty in strength above his father Anshar who begat
him.

20. Unrivalled amongst the gods his brothers ...

21. The confraternity of the gods was established.

22. Tiâmat was troubled and she ... their guardian.

23. Her belly was stirred up to its uttermost depths.

24. ...........

25. Apsu (the watery abyss) could not diminish their brawl

26. And Tiâmat gathered herself together ...

27. She struck a blow, and their works ...

28. Their way was not good,...

29. At that time Apsu, the progenitor of the great gods,

30. Shouted out and summoned Mummu, the steward of his house, saying

31. "[O] Mummu, my steward, who makest my liver to rejoice,

32. "Come, to Tiâmat we will go."

33. They went, they lay down [on a couch] facing Tiâmat.

34. They took counsel together about the gods [their children].

35. Apsu took up his word and said,

36. To Tiâmat, the holy (?) one, he made mention of a matter,
[saying],

37. "... their way ...

38. "By day I find no peace, by night I have no rest.

39. "Verily I will make an end of their way, I will sweep them away,

40. "There shall be a sound of lamentation; lo, then we shall rest."

41. Tiâmat on hearing this

42. Was stirred up to wrath and shrieked to her husband,[1]

[Footnote 1: Tiâmat's wrath was roused by Apsu, who had proposed to slay
the gods, her children. She took no part in the first struggle of Apsu
and Mummu against the gods, and only engaged in active hostilities to
avenge Apsu.]

43. ... unto sickness. She raged all alone,

44. She uttered a curse, and unto [Apsu, spake, saying,],

45. "Whatsoever we have made we will destroy.

46. "Verily their way shall be filled with disaster; lo, then we shall
rest."

47. Mummu answered and gave counsel unto Apsu,

48. The counsel of Mummu was ... and dire [in respect of the gods]:

49. "Come, [do thou destroy] their way which is strong.

50. "Then verily by day thou shalt find peace, [and] by night thou
shalt have rest."

51. Apsu heard him, his face grew bright,

52. For that they were planning evil against the gods, his children.

53. Mummu embraced his neck ...

54. He took him on his knee, he kissed him ...

55. They (i.e. Mummu and Apsu) planned the cursing in the
assembly,

56. They repeated the curses to the gods their eldest sons.

57. The gods made answer ...

58. They began a lamentation...

59. [Endowed] with understanding, the prudent god, the exalted one,

60. Ea, who pondereth everything that is, searched out their [plan].

61. He brought it to nought (?), he made the form of everything to
stand still.

62. He recited a cunning incantation, very powerful and holy.

[In the British Museum tablets lines 63-108 are either wanting
entirely, or are too broken to translate, and the last 130 lines of
the Berlin fragment are much mutilated. The fragments of text show
that Ea waged war against Apsu and Mummu. Ea recited an incantation
which caused Apsu to fall asleep. He then "loosed the joints" of
Mummu, who in some way suffered, but he was strong enough to attack Ea
when he turned to deal with Apsu. Ea overcame both his adversaries and
divided Apsu into chambers and laid fetters upon him.  In one of the
chambers of Apsu a god was begotten and born.  According to the
Ninevite theologians Ea begat by his wife, who is not named, his son
Marduk, and according to the theologians of the City of Ashur, Lakhmu
begat by his wife Lakhamu a son who is no other than Anshar, or
Ashur. A nurse was appointed to rear him, and he grew up a handsome
child, to the great delight of his father. He had four ears and four
eyes, a statement which suggests that he was two-headed, and resembled
the Latin god Janus.]

109. They formed a band, and went forth to battle to help Tiâmat.

110. They were exceedingly wroth, they made plots by day and by night
without ceasing.

111. They offered battle, fuming and raging.

112. They set the battle in array, they uttered cries[1] of hostility,

[Footnote 1: Literally, "they excited themselves to hostility."]

113. Ummu-Khubur,[1] who fashioned all things,

[Footnote 1: A title of Tiâmat.]

114. Set up the unrivalled weapon, she spawned huge serpents,

115. Sharp of tooth, pitiless in attack (?)

116. She filled their bodies with venom instead of blood,

117. Grim, monstrous serpents, arrayed in terror,

118. She decked them with brightness, she fashioned them in exalted
forms,

119. So that fright and horror might overcome him that looked upon
them,

120. So that their bodies might rear up, and no man resist their
attack,

121. She set up the Viper, and the Snake, and the god Lakhamu,

122. The Whirlwind, the ravening Dog, the Scorpion-man,

123. The mighty Storm-wind, the Fish-man, the horned Beast
(Capricorn?)

124. They carried the Weapon[1] which spared not, nor flinched from
the battle.

[Footnote 1: These nine monsters with the Weapon (Thunderbolt?) and
Kingu form the Eleven Allies of Tiâmat, and it is clear that she and
her Allies represent the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac. When Marduk
destroyed Tiâmat and her associates, he found it necessary to fix the
stars, the images of the great gods, in their places, as the Twelve
Signs of the Zodiac. (See the Fifth Tablet of Creation, p. 55.)]

125. Most mighty were Tiâmat's decrees, they could not be resisted,

126. Thus she caused eleven [monsters] of this kind to come into
being,

127. Among the gods, her first-born son who had collected her company,

128. That is to say, Kingu, she set on high, she made him the great
one amongst them,

129. Leader of the hosts in battle, disposer of the troops,

130. Bearer of the firmly grasped weapon, attacker in the fight,

131. He who in the battle is the master of the weapon,

132. She appointed, she made him to sit down in [goodly apparel]

133. [Saying], "I have uttered the incantation for thee. I have
magnified thee in the assembly of the gods.

134. "I have filled his [_sic_, read 'thy'] hand with the
sovereignty of the whole company of the gods.

135. "Mayest thou be magnified, thou who art my only spouse,

136. "May the Anunnaki make great thy renown over all of them."

137. She gave him the TABLET OF DESTINIES, she fastened it on his
breast, [saying],

138. "As for thee, thy command shall not fall empty, whatsoever goeth
forth from thy mouth shall be established."

139. When Kingu was raised on high and had taken the heavens
(literally, the god Anutum)

140. He fixed the destinies for the gods his sons,

141. Open your mouths, let the Fire-god[1] be quenched,

[Footnote 1: The god here alluded to is Mardak, who, in one aspect, is
a fire-god; see Tablet IV, II. 39, 40.]

142. He who is glorious in battle and is most mighty, shall do great
deeds.



SECOND TABLET.

1. Tiâmat made solid that which she had moulded.

2. She bound the gods her children with [evil bonds].

3. Tiâmat wrought wickedness to avenge Apsu.

4. When ... had harnessed his chariot he went to meet Ea,

5. Ea hearkened to his story,

6. He was sorely afflicted and abode in sorrow,

7. The days were long, his wrath died down.

8. He went his way to the dwelling of Anshar, his father,

9. He went into the presence of Anshar, the father who begat him,

[Illustration: Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text
of the Second Tablet of the Creation Series. [No. 40,559.]]

10. Whatsoever Tiâmat had devised he repeated unto him,

11. Mother Tiâmat who gave us birth hath sown these things.

12. She hath set in order her assembly, she rageth furiously,

13. All the gods have joined themselves to her.

14. They march by her side together with those whom ye have created.

15. They formed a band and went forth to battle to help Tiâmat,

16. They were exceedingly wroth, they made plots by day and by night
without ceasing,

17. They offered battle, fuming and raging,

18. They set the battle in array, they uttered cries of defiance.

19. Ummu-Khubur,[1] who fashioned all things,

[Footnote 1: See above.]

20. Set up the unrivalled weapon, she spawned huge serpents

21. Sharp of tooth, pitiless in attack (?)

22. She filled their bodies with venom instead of blood,

23. Grim, monstrous serpents arrayed in terror.

24. She decked them with brightness, she fashioned them in exalted
forms,

25. So that fright and horror might overcome him that looked upon
them,

26. So that their bodies might rear up, and no man resist their
attack.

27. She set up the Viper, and the Snake, and the god Lakhamu,

28. The Whirlwind, the ravening Dog, the Scorpion-man,

29. The Storm-wind, the Fish-man, the Horned Beast.

30. They carried the Weapon which spared not, nor flinched from the
battle.

31. Most mighty were Tiâmat's allies, they could not be resisted.

32. Thus she caused eleven [monsters] of this kind to come into being.

33. Among the gods, her first-born son who had collected her company,

34. That is to say, Kingu, she set on high, she made him the great one
amongst them.

35. Leader of the hosts in battle, disposer of the troops,

36. Bearer of the firmly-grasped weapon, attacker in the fight,

37. He who in the battle is the master of the weapon,

38. She appointed, she made him to sit down in [goodly apparel]

39. [Saying], "I have recited the incantation for thee, I have
magnified thee in the assembly of the gods,

40. "I have filled his [_sic_, read 'thy'] hand with the
sovereignty of the whole company of the gods.

41. "Mayest thou be magnified, thou who art my only spouse,

42. "May the Anunnaki make great thy renown over all of them."

43. She gave him the TABLET OF DESTINIES, she fastened it on his
breast, [saying]--

44. "As for thee, thy command shall not fall empty, what goeth forth
from thy mouth shall be established."

45. When Kingu was raised on high and had taken the heavens
(literally, "the god Anutum")

46. He fixed the destinies for the gods his sons, [saying],

47. "Open your mouths, let the Fire-god be quenched,

48. "He who is glorious in battle and is most mighty shall do great
deeds."

49. When Anshar heard that Tiâmat was stirred mightily,

50. ... he bit his lips

51. ... his mind was not at peace

[Lines 52-54 too fragmentary for translation.]

An'shar then addresses Ea and says:--

55. "Thou hast slain Mummu and Apsu

56. "But Tiâmat hath exalted Kingu--where is the one who can meet her?

[Lines 57 and 58 imperfect; lines 59-71 wanting.]

72. Anshar spake a word unto his son [Anu]:--

73. "... this is a difficulty, my warrior

74. "Whose power is exalted, whose attack cannot be stayed,

75. "Go and stand thou in the presence of Tiâmat,

76. "That her spirit [be quieted], her heart softened.

77. "But should she not hearken unto thy word,

78. "Speak thou our word unto her so that she may be abated."

79. [Anu] heard the order of his father Anshar.

80. He took the straight road to her, and hastened on the way to her.

81. Anu drew nigh, he searched out the plan of Tiâmat,

82. He could not prevail against her, he turned back.

Lines 83 and 84 contain Anu's report to Anshar, but they are too
fragmentary to translate; line 85 reads:--

83. He (Anu) went to his father Anshar who begat him,

84. He spake unto him a word [concerning Tiâmat]

85. [She laid] hands upon me that withered me up."

86. Anshar was distressed, he looked down upon the ground,

87. He turned pale; towards Ea he lifted up his head.

88. All the Anunnaki assembled at their posts.

89. They shut their mouths, they sat in lamentation.

90. [They said], "Nowhere is there a god who can attack Tiâmat.

91. "He would not escape from Tiâmat's presence with his life."

92. The Lord Anshar, the Father of the gods, [spake] majestically,

93. He lifted up his heart, he addressed the Anunnaki, [saying]

94. "He whose [strength] is mighty [shall be] an avenger for [us]

95. "The ... in the strife, Marduk the Hero."

96. Ea called Marduk to the place where he gave oracles,

97. Marduk came and according to his heart he addressed him,

98. [Saying], "O Marduk, hear the counsel and advice of thy father,

99. "Thou art the son who refresheth his heart,

100. "Draw nigh and enter the presence of An-shar,

101. "Stand there [with joy], when he looketh upon thee he will be at
rest."[1]

[Footnote 1: Lines 83, 84, 88-101 are translated from the British
Museum fragments and the Berlin fragments; lines 88-101 contain the
equivalent to the whole gap in the British Museum tablet.]

113. The Lord [Marduk] rejoiced at the word of his father,

114. He approached and took up his place before Anshar.

115. Anshar looked upon him and his heart was filled with gladness.

116. He (i.e., Anshar) kissed his (Marduk's) lips, and his
(Anshar's) fear was removed. [Then Marduk said]

117. "My father, let not the opening of thy mouth be closed,[1]

[Footnote 1: i.e., "let what thou sayest prevail."]

118. "I will go, I will make to take place all that is in thy heart.

119. "Anshar, let not the opening of thy mouth be closed,

120. "I will go, I will make to take place all that is in thy heart."
[Anshar says to Marduk]

121. "What man is the cause of the battle which made thee go forth

122. "... Tiâmat, who is a woman, pursueth thee with weapons.

123. "Rejoice our [hearts] and make us glad.

124. "Thou thyself shalt soon trample upon the neck of Tiâmat,

125. "Rejoice our [hearts] and make us glad.

126. "Thou thyself shalt soon trample upon the neck of Tiâmat.

127. "My son, who dost comprehend everything,

128. "Cast deep sleep upon Tiâmat with thy holy spell.

129. "Betake thyself to thy march with all speed.

130. "..."

131. The Lord [Marduk] rejoiced at the word of his father,

132. His heart leaped with joy, to his father he spake, [saying],

133. "O Lord of the gods, Overlord of the Great Gods,

134. "Should I as your avenger

135. "Slay Tiâmat and bestow life upon you,

136. "Summon a meeting, proclaim and magnify my position,

137. "Sit ye down together in friendly fashion in Upshukkinaku.

138. "Let me issue decrees by the opening of my mouth even as ye do.

139. "Whatsoever I bring to pass let it remain unaltered,

140. "That which my mouth uttereth shall never fail or be brought to
nought."



THIRD TABLET.

1. Anshar opened his mouth, and

2. Unto the god Gaga, his envoy, spake a word [saying],

3. "O Gaga, my envoy, who makest glad my liver.

4. "I will despatch thee unto the gods Lakhmu and Lakhamu.

[Illustration: Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text
of the Third Tablet of the Creation Series. [No. 93,017.]]

5. "Thou must know and understand the [intention of my heart]

6. "... are brought before thee

7. "... all the gods.

8. "Let them make a council, let them sit down to a feast

9. "Let them eat bread, let them heat sesame wine.

10. "Let them issue decrees to Marduk as their avenger.

11. "Get thee gone, Gaga, take up thy stand before them.

12. "All that I am now going to tell thee do thou repeat to them
[saying],

13. "'[O ye gods], Anshar your son hath charged me,

14. "'The intention of his heart he hath made me to know in this
wise:--

15. "'Mother Tiâmat who gave us birth hath sown these things,

16. "'She hath set in order her assembly, she rageth furiously,

17. "'All the gods have joined themselves to her.

18. "'They march by her side together with those whom ye have created.

19. "'They formed a band and went forth to battle to help Tiâmat.

20. "'They were exceedingly wroth, they made plots by day and by night
without ceasing.

21. "'They offered battle, foaming and raging.

22. "'They set the battle in array, they uttered cries of defiance.

23. "'Ummu-Khubur, who formed all things,

24. "'Set up the unrivalled weapon, she spawned huge serpents,

25. "'Sharp of tooth, pitiless in attack (?)

26. "'She filled their bodies with venom instead of blood.

27. "'Grim, monstrous serpents arrayed in terror.

28. "'She decked them with brightness, she fashioned them in exalted
forms,

29. "'So that fright and horror might overcome him that looked upon
them,

30. "'So that their bodies might rear up, and no man resist their
attack.

31. "'She set up the Viper, and the Snake, and the god Lakhamu,

32. "'The Whirlwind, the Ravening Dog, the Scorpion-man,

33. "'The Storm-wind, the Fish-man, the Horned Beast.

34. "'They carried the Weapon which spared not, nor flinched from the
battle,

35. "'Most mighty were Tiâmat's allies, they could not be resisted.

36. "'Thus she caused Eleven [monsters] of this kind to come into
being.

37. "'Among the gods, her first-born son who had collected her
company,

38. "'That is to say, Kingu, she set on high, she made him the great
one among them,

39. "'Leader of the hosts in the battle, disposer of the troops,

40. "'Bearer of the firmly-grasped weapon, attacker in the fight.

41. "'He who in the battle is the master of the weapon,

42. "'She appointed, she made him to sit down in [goodly apparel]

43. "'[Saying]: I have recited the incantation for thee, I have
magnified thee in the assembly of the gods.

44. "''I have filled his (i.e., thy) hand with the sovereignty
of the whole company of the gods.

45. "''Mayest thou be magnified, thou who art my only spouse,

46. "''May the Anunnaki make great thy renown over all of them."'

47. "She gave him the TABLET OF DESTINIES, she fastened it on his head
[saying]:

48. "'As for thee, thy command shall not fall empty, what goeth forth
from thy mouth shall be established.'

49. "When Kingu was raised on high and had taken the heavens
(literally, the god Anutum),

50. "He fixed the destinies for the gods, his sons, [saying]:

51. "'Open your mouths, let the Fire-god be quenched.

52. "'He who is glorious in battle and is most mighty shall do great
deeds.'

53. "'I sent the god Anu, but he could not prevail against her.

54. "'Nudimmud (i.e., Ea) was afraid and turned back,

55. "'Marduk, your son, the envoy of the gods, hath set out.

56. "'His heart is stirred up to oppose Tiâmat.

57. "'He opened his mouth, he spoke unto me [saying]:

58. "'Should I as your avenger

59. "'Slay Tiâmat, and bestow life upon you,

60. "'Summon a meeting, proclaim and magnify my position,

61. "'Sit ye down together in friendly fashion in Up-shukkinaku.

62. "'Let me issue decrees by the opening of my mouth even as ye do,

63. "'Whatsoever I bring to pass let it remain unaltered.

64. "'That which my mouth uttereth shall neither fail nor be brought
to nought.'

65. "Hasten ye therefore, issue your decrees speedily

66. "That he may go to meet your mighty enemy."

67. Gaga departed and hastened upon his way

68. To the god Lakhmu and the goddess Lakhamu, the gods his fathers,
reverently

69. He did homage, and he kissed the ground at their feet.

70. He bowed down, stood up, and spake unto them [saying]:

71. "[O ye gods], Anshar your son hath charged me,

72. "The intention of his heart he hath made me to know in this
wise:--

73. "Mother Tiâmat who gave us birth hath sown these things,

74. "She hath set in order her assembly, she rageth furiously.

75. "All the gods have joined themselves to her.

76. "They march by her side together with those whom ye have created,

77. "They formed a band and went forth to battle to help Tiâmat.

78. "They were exceedingly wroth, they made plans by day and by night
without ceasing.

79. "They offered battle, foaming and raging.

80. "They set the battle in array, they uttered cries of defiance.

81. "Ummu-Khubur, who formed all things,

82. "Set up the unrivalled weapon, she spawned huge serpents,

83. "Sharp of tooth, pitiless in attack (?)

84. "She filled their bodies with venom instead of blood,

85. "Grim, monstrous serpents, arrayed in terror,

86. "She decked them with brightness, she fashioned them in exalted
forms,

87. "So that fright and horror might overcome him that looked upon
them,

88. "So that their bodies might rear up, and no man resist their
attack.

89. "She set up the Viper, and the Snake, and the god Lakhamu,

90. "The Whirlwind, the Ravening Dog, the Scorpion-man,

91. "The Storm-wind, the Fish-man, the Horned Beast,

92. "They carried the Weapon which spared not, nor flinched from the
battle.

93. "Most mighty were Tiâmat's allies, they could not be resisted.

94. "Thus she caused Eleven [monsters] of this kind to come into
being.

95. "Amongst the gods, her first-born son who had collected her
company,

96. "That is to say, Kingu, she set on high, she made him the great
one among them.

97. "Leader of the hosts in the battle, disposer of the troops,

98. "Bearer of the firmly-grasped weapon, attacker in the fight,

99. "He who in the battle is the master of the weapon

100. "She appointed, she made him to sit down in [goodly apparel],

101. "[Saying]: 'I have recited the incantation for thee, I have
magnified thee in the assembly of the gods.

102. "'I have filled his (i.e., thy) hand with the sovereignty
of the whole company of the gods.

103. "'Mayest thou be magnified, thou who art my only spouse.

104. "'May the Anunnaki make great thy renown over all of them.'

105. "She gave him the TABLET OF DESTINIES, she fastened it on his
head [saying]:

106. "'As for thee, thy command shall not fall empty, what goeth forth
from thy mouth shall be established.'

107. "When Kingu was raised on high, and had taken the heavens
(Anutum)

108. "He fixed the destinies for the gods, his sons, [saying]:

109. "'Open your mouths, let the Fire-god be quenched,

110. "'He who is glorious in battle and is most mighty shall do great
deeds.

111. "'I sent the god Anu, but he could not prevail against her.

112. "'Nudimmud (i.e., Ea) was afraid and turned back.

113. "'Marduk, your son, the envoy of the gods, hath set out.

114. "'His heart is stirred up to oppose Tiâmat.

115. "'He opened his mouth, he spoke unto me, [saying]:

116. "'Should I as your avenger

117. "'Slay Tiâmat, and bestow life upon you,

118. "'Summon a meeting (i.e., council), proclaim and magnify my
position,

119. "'Sit down together in friendly fashion in Upshukkinaku,

120. "'Let me issue decrees by the opening of my mouth, even as ye do,

121. "'Whatsoever I bring to pass let it remain unaltered.

122. "'That which my mouth uttereth shall neither fail nor be brought
to nought."'

123. "Hasten ye therefore, issue your decrees speedily

124. "That he may go to meet your mighty enemy."

125. The gods Lakhmu and Lakhamu heard, they wailed loudly,

126. All the Igigi gods wept bitterly [saying]:

127. "Who were [our] enemies until [the gods] were posted [in heaven]?

128. "We cannot comprehend the work of Tiâmat."

129. They gathered themselves together, they went,

130. All the great gods, who issue decrees.

131. They entered in, they filled [the court] before Anshar.

132. Brother [god] kissed brother [god] in the [divine] assembly,

133. They held a meeting, they sat down to a feast,

134. They ate bread, they heated the [sesame wine],

135. The taste of the sweet drink confused their ...

136. They drank themselves drunk, their bodies were filled to
overflowing,

137. They were overcome by heaviness [of drink], their livers
(i.e., spirits) were exalted,

138. They issued the decree for Marduk as their avenger.



FOURTH TABLET.

1. They founded for him a majestic canopy,

2. He (i.e., Marduk) seated himself in the seat of kingship in
the presence of his fathers [who said unto him]:

3. "Thou art honourable by reason of thy greatness among the gods.

4. "Thy position is unrivalled, the words thou utterest become Anum
(i.e., as fixed as the sky).

5. "Thou art honourable by reason of thy greatness among the gods.

6. "Thy position is unrivalled, the words thou utterest become Anum
(i.e., as fixed as the sky).

7. "From this day onward thy command shall not be abrogated.

8. "The power to exalt to heaven and to cast down to the earth both
shall be in thy hand,

9. "That which goeth forth from thy mouth shall be established,
against thy utterance shall be no appeal.

10. "No one among the gods shall overstep thy boundary,

11. "Worship, which is the object of the sanctuary of the gods,

12. "Whensoever they lack [it] shall be forthcoming in thy sanctuary,

13. "O god Marduk, thou art our avenger.

14. "We have given unto thee sovereignty over the whole creation,

15. "Thou shalt sit down, in the council thy word shall be exalted,

16. "Thy weapon shall never fall [from thy hands], it shall break the
head of thy foe.

17. "Lord, whosoever putteth his trust in thee, spare thou his life,

18. "And the god who deviseth evil, pour thou out his soul."

19. Then a cloak (literally, one cloak) was set in their midst,

20. They addressed the god Marduk their first-born [saying]:

21. "Thou, Lord, shalt hold the foremost position among the gods.

22. "Decree thou the throwing down[1] and the building up,[2] and it
shall come to pass.

[Footnote 1: _I.e._, the destruction of Tiâmat.]

[Footnote 2: _I.e._, the establishing of a new creation to take
the place of the old.]

23. "Speak but the word, and the cloak shall disappear,

24. "Speak a second time and the cloak shall return uninjured."

25. Marduk spoke the word, the cloak disappeared,

26. He spoke a second time, the cloak reappeared.

27. When the gods his fathers saw the issue of the utterance of his
mouth

28. They rejoiced and adored [him, saying], "Marduk is King."

29. They conferred upon him the sceptre, the throne, and the symbol of
royalty (?)[1]

[Footnote 1: The meaning of _pal-a_ is unknown.]

30. They gave him the unrivalled weapon, the destroyer of the enemy
[saying]:

31. "Go, cut off the life of Tiâmat.

32. "Let the wind carry her blood into the depth [under the earth]."

33. The gods, his fathers, issued the decree for the god Bel.

34. They set him on the road which leadeth to peace and adoration.

35. He strung [his] bow, he set ready his weapon [in the stand],

36. He slung his spear, he attached it to [his belly],

37. He raised the club, he grasped it in his right hand.

38. The bow and the quiver he hung at his side.[1]

[Footnote 1: This equipment of the charioteer is shown on the
bas-reliefs.]

39. He set the lightning in front of him.

40. His body was filled with a glancing flame of fire.

41. He made a net wherewith to enclose Tiâmat.

42. He made the four winds to take up their position so that no part
of her might escape,

[Illustration: Portion of a tablet inscribed in Babylonian with a text
of the Fourth Tablet of the Creation Series. [No. 93,016.]]

43. The South wind, the North wind, the East wind, the West wind.

44. He held the net close to his side, the gift of his father Anu,

45. He created the "foul" wind, the storm, the parching blast,

46. The wind of "four," the wind of "seven," the typhoon, the wind
incomparable

[Illustration: Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text
of the Fourth Tablet of the Creation Series. [K. 3437.]]

47. He despatched the seven winds which he had made,

48. To make turbid the inward parts of Tiâmat; they followed in his
train.

49. The Lord raised up the wind storm, his mighty weapon.

50. He went up into his chariot, the unequalled and terrible
tempest.[1]

[Footnote 1: Compare Psalms xviii, 7-15; civ, i ff.]

51. He equipped it, he yoked thereto a team of four horses,

52. Pawing the ground, champing, foaming [eager to] fly,

53. ... [the odour] of their teeth bore foetidness,

54. They were skilled [in biting], they were trained to trample under
foot.

[Lines 55-57 too fragmentary to translate; they continue the
description of Marduk's equipment.]

58. His brightness streamed forth, his head was crowned [thereby].

59. He took a direct path, he hastened on his journey.

60. He set his face towards the place of Tiâmat, who was ...

61. On his lips ... he restrained

62. ... his hand grasped.

63. At that moment the gods were gazing upon him with fixed intensity,

64. The gods, his fathers, gazed upon him, they gazed upon him.

65. The Lord approached, he looked upon the middle of Tiâmat,

66. He searched out the plan of Kingu, her husband.

67. Marduk looked, Kingu staggered in his gait,

68. His will was destroyed, his motion was paralysed.

69. And the gods his helpers who were marching by his side

70. Saw the [collapse of] their chief and their sight was troubled.

71. Tiâmat [shrieked but] did not turn her head.

72. With lips full of [rebellious words] she maintained her
stubbornness

73. [Saying], "... that thou hast come as the Lord of the gods,
[forsooth],

74. "They have appointed thee in the place which should be theirs."

75. The Lord raised up the wind-storm, his mighty weapon,

76. [Against] Tiâmat, who was furious (?), he sent it, [saying]:

77. "[Thou hast made thyself] mighty, thou art puffed upon high,

78. "Thy heart [hath stirred thee up] to invoke battle

79. "... their fathers ...

80. "...

81. "[Thou hast exalted Kingu to be [thy] husband,

82. "[Thou hast made him to usurp] the attributes of Anu

83. "... thou hast planned evil.

84. "[Against] the gods, my fathers, thou hast wrought evil.

85. "Let now thy troops gird themselves up, let them bind on their
weapons.

86. "Stand up! Thou and I, let us to the fight!"

87. On hearing these words Tiâmat

88. Became like a mad thing, her senses became distraught,

89. Tiâmat uttered shrill cries again and again.

90. That on which she stood split in twain at the words,

91. She recited an incantation, she pronounced her spell.

92. The gods of battle demanded their weapons.[1]

[Footnote 1: I.e., the gods were impatient to begin the fight.]

93. Tiâmat and Marduk, the envoy of the gods, roused themselves,

94. They advanced to fight each other, they drew nigh in battle.

95. The Lord cast his net and made it to enclose her,

96. The evil wind that had its place behind him he let out in her
face.

97. Tiâmat opened her mouth to its greatest extent,

98. Marduk made the evil wind to enter [it] whilst her lips were
unclosed.

99. The raging winds filled out her belly,

100. Her heart was gripped, she opened wide her mouth [panting].

101. Marduk grasped the spear, he split up her belly,

102. He clave open her bowels, he pierced [her] heart,

103. He brought her to nought, he destroyed her life.

104. He cast down her carcase, he took up his stand upon it,

105. After Marduk had slain Tiâmat the chief,

106. Her host was scattered, her levies became fugitive,

107. And the gods, her allies, who had marched at her side,

108. Quaked with terror, and broke and ran

109. And betook themselves to flight to save their lives.

110. But they found themselves hemmed in, they could not escape,

111. Marduk tied them up, he smashed their weapons.

112. They were cast into the net, and they were caught in the snare,

113. The ... of the world they filled with [their] cries of grief.

114. They received [Marduk's] chastisement, they were confined in
restraint,

115. And [on] the Eleven Creatures which Tiâmat had filled with
awfulness,

116. The company of the devils that marched at her ...

117. He threw fetters, he ... their sides.

118. They and their resistance he trod under his feet.

119. The god Kingu who had been magnified over them

120. He crushed, he esteemed him [as little worth] as the god Dugga,
(as a dead god?).

121. Marduk took from him the TABLET OF DESTINIES, which should never
have been his,

122. He sealed it with a seal[1] and fastened it on his breast

[Footnote 1: By impressing his seal on the Tablet Marduk proved his
ownership of the Tablet, and made his claim to it legal.]

123. After he had crushed and overthrown his enemies,

124. He made the haughty enemy to be like the dust underfoot.

125. He established completely Anshar's victory over the enemy,

126. The valiant Marduk achieved the object of Nudimmud (Ea),[1]

[Footnote 1: This is an oblique way of saying that Marduk succeeded
where Ea failed.]

127. He imposed strict restraint on the gods whom he had made captive.

128. He turned back to Tiâmat whom he had defeated,

129. The Lord [Marduk] trampled on the rump of Tiâmat,

130. With his unsparing club he clave her skull.

131. He slit open the channels (i.e., arteries) of her blood.

132. He caused the North Wind to carry it away to a place underground.

133. His fathers (i.e., the gods) looked on, they rejoiced, they were
glad.

134. They brought unto him offerings of triumph and peace,

135. The Lord [Marduk] paused, he examined Tiâmat's carcase.

136. He separated flesh [from] hair,[1] he worked cunningly.

[Footnote 1: The word is _kupu_, i.e., "reed" or "sedge."
It is possible that Marduk skinned Tiâmat.]

137. He slit Tiâmat open like a flat (?) fish [cut into] two pieces,

138. The one half he raised up and shaded the heavens therewith,

139. He pulled the bolt, he posted a guard,

140. He ordered them not to let her water escape.

141. He crossed heaven, he contemplated the regions thereof.

142. He betook himself to the abode of Nudimmud (Ea) that is opposite
to the Deep (Apsu),

143. The Lord Marduk measured the dimensions of the Deep,

144. He founded E-Sharra, a place like unto it,

145. The abode E-Sharra, which he made to be heaven.

146. He made the-gods Anu, Bel and Ea to inhabit their [own] cities.



FIFTH TABLET.

1. He appointed the Stations for the great gods,

2. He set in heaven the Stars of the Zodiac which are their
likenesses.

3. He fixed the year, he appointed the limits thereof.

4. He set up for the twelve months three stars apiece.

5. According to the day of the year he ... figures.

6. He founded the Station of Nibir (Jupiter) to settle their
boundaries,

7. That none might exceed or fall short.

8. He set the Station of Bel and Ea thereby.

9. He opened great gates under shelter on both sides.

10. He made a strong corridor on the left and on the right.

11. He fixed the zenith in the heavenly vault (?)

12. He gave the god Nannar (i.e., the Moon-god) his brightness
and committed the night to his care.

[Illustration: Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text
of the Fifth Tablet of the Creation Series. [K. 3567.]]

13. He set him for the government of the night, to determine the day

14. Monthly, without fail, he set him in a crown (i.e., disk)
[saying]:

15. "At the beginning of the month when thou risest over the land,

16. "Make [thy] horns to project to limit six days [of the month]

17. "On the seventh day make thyself like a crown.

18. "On the fourteenth day ...

[Lines 19-26 dealt further with Marduk's instructions to the Moon-god,
but are too fragmentary to translate. After line 26 comes a break in
the text of 40 lines; lines 66-74 are too fragmentary to translate,
but they seem to have described further acts of Creation.]

75. The gods, his (Marduk's) fathers, looked on the net which he had
made,

76. They observed how craftily the bow had been constructed,

77. They extolled the work which he had done.

78. [Then] the god Anu lifted up [the bow] in the company of the gods,

79. He kissed the bow [saying]: "That ..."

80. He proclaimed [the names] of the bow to be as follows:--

81. "Verily, the first is 'Long Wood,' the second is ...

82. "Its third name is 'Bow Star in heaven' ..."

83. He fixed a station for it ...

[Of the remaining 57 lines of this tablet only fragments of 17 lines
are preserved, and these yield no connected sense.]



SIXTH TABLET.

1. On hearing the words of the gods, the heart of Marduk moved him to
carry out the works of a craftsman.

2. He opened his mouth, he spake to Ea that which he had planned in
his heart, he gave counsel [saying]:

3. "I will solidify blood, I will form bone.

4. "I will set up man, 'Man' [shall be] his name.

5. "I will create the man 'Man.'

6. "The service of the gods shall be established, and I will set them
(i.e., the gods) free.

7. "I will make twofold the ways of the gods, and I will beautify
[them].

8. "They are [now] grouped together in one place, but they shall be
partitioned in two."[1]

[Footnote 1: Reading, _ishtenish lu kuppudu-ma ana shina lu
uzizu_.]

9. Ea answered and spake a word unto him

10. For the consolation of the gods[1] he repeated unto him a word of
counsel [saying]:

[Footnote 1: _I.e._, "to cause the gods to be content,"]

11. "Let one brother [god of their number] be given, let him suffer
destruction that men may be fashioned.

12. "Let the great gods be assembled, let this [chosen] one be given
in order that they (i.e., the other gods) may be established."

13. Marduk assembled the great gods, [he came near] graciously, he
issued a decree,

14. He opened his mouth, he addressed the gods; the King spake a word
unto the Anunnaki [saying]:

15. "Verily, that which I spake unto you aforetime was true.

16. "[This time also] I speak truth. [Some there were who] opposed
me.[1]

[Footnote 1: Literally "they (indefinite) opposed me."]

17. "Who was it that created the strife,

18. "Who caused Tiâmat to revolt, to join battle with me?

19. "Let him who created the strife be given [as sacrifice],

20. "I will cause the axe in the act of sinking to do away his sin."

21. The great gods, the Igigi, answered him,

22. Unto the King of the gods of heaven and of earth, the Prince of
the gods, their lord [they said]:

23. "[It was] Kingu who created the strife,

24. "Who made Tiâmat to revolt, to join battle [with thee]."

25. They bound him in fetters [they brought] him before Ea, they
inflicted punishment on him, they let his blood,

26. From his blood he (i.e., Ea) fashioned mankind for the
service of the gods, and he set the gods free.

27. After Ea had fashioned man he ... laid service upon him.

28. [For] that work, which pleased him not, man was chosen: Marduk ...

29. Marduk, the King of the gods, divided ... he set the Anunnaki up
on high.

30. He laid down for Anu a decree that protected [his] heart ... as a
guard.

31. He made twofold the ways on the earth [and in the heavens?]

32. By decrees ...

33. The Anunnaki who ...

34. The Anunnaki ...

35. They spake unto Marduk, their lord, [saying]:

36. "O thou Moon-god[1] (Nannaru), who hast established our splendour,

[Footnote 1: See _Cuneiform Texts_, Part XXIV, Plate 50, where it
is said that the god Sin is "Marduk, who maketh bright the night."]

37. "What benefit have we conferred upon thee?

38. "Come, let us make a shrine, whose name shall be renowned;

39. "Come [at] night, our time of festival, let us take our ease
therein,

40. "Come, the staff shall rule ...

41. "On the day that we reach [thereto] we will take our ease
therein."

42. On hearing this Marduk ...

43. The features of his face [shone like] the day exceedingly.

44. [He said],[1] "Like unto ... Babylon, the construction whereof ye
desire

[Footnote 1: Lines 44 and 45 announce Marduk's determination to build
Babylon.]

45. "I will make ... a city, I will fashion a splendid shrine."

46. The Anunnaki worked the mould [for making bricks], their bricks
were ...

47. In the second year [the shrine was as high as] a hill, and the
summit of E-Sagila reached the [celestial] Ocean.

48. They made the ziggurat[1] [to reach] the celestial Ocean; unto
Marduk, Enlil, Ea [shrines] they appointed,

[Footnote 1: This is the word commonly used for "temple-tower." The
famous ziggurat of E-Sagila here mentioned was built in Seven Stages
or Steps, each probably having its own distinctive colour. It was
destroyed probably soon after the capture of Babylon by Cyrus (539
B.C.) and when Alexander the Great reached Babylon he found it ruins.]

49. It (i.e., the ziggurat) stood before them majestically: at the
bottom and [at the top] they observed its two horns.[1]

[Footnote 1: This is the first known mention of the "horns" of a
ziggurat, and the exact meaning of the word is doubtful.]

50. After the Anunnaki had finished the construction of E-Sagila, and
had completed the making of their shrines,

51. They gathered together from the ... of the Ocean (Apsu). In
BAR-MAH, the abode which they had made,

52. He (i.e., Marduk) made the gods his fathers to take their
seats ... [saying]: "This Babylon shall be your abode.

53. "No mighty one [shall destroy] his house, the great gods shall
dwell therein.

[After line 53 the middle portions of several lines of text are
obliterated, but from what remains of it it is clear that the gods
partook of a meal of consecration of the shrine of E-Sagila, and then
proceeded to issue decrees. Next Marduk assigns seats to the Seven
Gods of Fate and to Enlil and Anu, and then he lays up in E-Sagila the
famous bow which he bore during his fight against Tiâmat. When the
text again becomes connected we find the gods singing a hymn of praise
to Marduk.]

94. "Whatever is ... those gods and goddesses shall bear(?)

95. "They shall never forget, they shall cleave to the god (?)

96. "... they shall make bright, they shall make shrines.

97. "Verily, the decision (concerning) the Black-headed [belongeth to]
the gods

98. "... all our names have they called, he (Marduk) is most holy
(_elli_)

99. "... they proclaimed and venerated (?) his names.

100. "His ... is exceedingly bright, his work is ...

101. "Marduk, whose father Anu proclaimed [his name] from his birth,

102. "Who hath set the day at his door ... his going,

103. "By whose help the storm wind was bound ...

104. "Delivered the gods his fathers in the time of trouble.

105. "Verily, the gods have proclaimed his sonship.

106. "In his bright light let them walk for ever.

107. "[On] men whom he hath formed, the created things fashioned by
his fingers

108. "He hath imposed the service of the gods, and them he hath set
free

109. "...

110. "... they looked at him,

111. "[He is] the far-seeing _(maruku)_ god, verily ...

112. "Who hath made glad the hearts of the Anunnaki, who hath made
them to ...

113. "The god Marudukku--verily, he is the object of trust of his
country ...

114. "Let men praise him ...

115. "The 'King of the Protecting Heart,' (?), hath arisen and hath
[bound] the Serpent ...

116. "Broad is his heart, mighty [his] belly.

117. "King of the gods of heaven and of earth, whose name our company
hath proclaimed,

118. "We will fulfil (?) the utterance of his mouth. Over his fathers
the gods,

119. "Yea, [over] the gods of heaven and earth, all of them,

120. "His kingship [we will exalt].

121. "[We] will look unto the King of all the heaven and the earth at
night when the place of all the gods is darkness (literally sadness).

122. "He hath assigned our dwelling in heaven and in earth in the time
of trouble,

123. "He hath allotted stations to the Igigi and the Anunnaki.

124. "The gods themselves are magnified by his name; may he direct
their sanctuaries.

125. "ASAR-LU-DUG, is his name by which his father Anu hath named him.

126. "Verily, he is the light of the gods, the mighty ...

127. "Who ... all the parts of heaven and of the land

128. "By a mighty combat he saved our dwelling in the time of trouble.

129. "ASAR-LU-DUG, the god who made him (i.e. man) to live, did
the god ... call him in the second place

130. "[And] the gods who had been formed, whom he fashioned as though
[they were] his offspring.

131. "He is the Lord who hath made all the gods to live by his holy
mouth."

[Lines 132-139 are too fragmentary to translate, but it is clear from
the text that remains that Lakhmu, and Lakhamu, and Anshar all
proclaimed the names of Marduk. When the text again becomes connected
Marduk has just been addressing the gods.]

140. In Up-shukkinaku[1] he appointed their council for them.

[Footnote 1: From this text it seems clear that Up-shukkinaku was the
name of a chamber in the temple of E-Sagila. This name probably means
the "chamber of the shakkanaku," i.e., the chamber in which the
governor of the city (_shakkanaku_) went annually to embrace the
hands of the god Bel-Marduk, from whom he thereby received the right
of sovereignty over the country.]

141. [They said]:--"Of [our] son, the Hero, our Avenger,

142. "We will exalt the name by our speech."

143. They sat down and in their assembly they proclaimed his rank.

144. Every one of them pronounced his name in the sanctuary.



SEVENTH TABLET.

1. O ASARI,--giver of plantations, appointer of sowing time,

2. Who dost make grain and fibrous plants, who makest garden herbs to
spring up.

3. O ASARU-ALIM--who art weighty in the council-chamber, who art
fertile in counsel,

4. To whom the gods pay worship (?) reverent ...

5. O ASARU-ALIM-NUNA--the adored light of the Father who begat him,

6. Who makest straight the direction of Anu, Bel, [and Ea].[1]

[Footnote 1: This line seems to imply that Marduk was regarded as the
instructor of the "old" gods; the allusion is, probably, to the "ways"
of Anu, Bel and Ea, which are treated as technical terms in
astrology.]

7. He is their patron who fixed [their] ...

8. Whose drink is abundance, who goeth forth ...

9. O TUTU--creator of their new life,

10. Supplier of their wants, that they may be satisfied [or, glad],

11. Let but [Tutu] recite an incantation, the gods shall be at rest;

12. Let but [the gods] attack him (i.e., Tutu) in wrath, he
shall resist them successfully;

13. Let him be raised up on a high throne in the assembly
of the gods....

14. None among the gods is like unto him.

15. O god TUTU, who art the god ZI-UKKINA, life of the host of the
gods,

16. Who stablished the shining heavens for the gods,

17. He founded their paths, he fixed [their courses].

18. Never shall his deeds be forgotten among men.

19. O god TUTU, who art ZI-AZAG, was the third name they gave
him--holder (i.e., possessor) of holiness,

20. God of the favourable wind, lord of adoration and grace,

21. Creator of fulness and abundance, stablisher of plenty,

22. Who turneth that which is little into that which is much.

23. In sore straits we have felt his favouring breeze.

24. Let them (the gods) declare, let them magnify, let them sing his
praises.

25. O TUTU, who art the god AGA-AZAG in the fourth place--let men
exult.

26. Lord of the holy incantation, who maketh the dead to live,

27. He felt compassion for the gods who were in captivity.

28. He riveted on the gods his enemies the yoke which had been resting
on them.

29. In mercy towards them he created mankind,

30. The Merciful One in whose power it is to give life.

31. His words shall endure for ever, they shall never be forgotten,

32. In the mouth of the Black-headed[1] whom his hands have made.

[Footnote 1: Here the title "Black-headed" refers to all mankind, but
it is sometimes used by the scribes to distinguish the population of
the Euphrates Valley from foreign peoples of light complexions.]

33. O God TUTU, who art the god MU-AZAG in the fifth place--let their
mouth recite a holy incantation [to him],

34. Who by his own holy incantation hath destroyed all the evil ones.

[Illustration: Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text
of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series. [K. 8522.]]

35. O god SHAZU, the wise heart of the gods, who searchest the inward
parts of the belly,

36. Who dost not permit the worker of evil to go forth by his side,

37. Establisher of the company of the gods ... their hearts.

38. Reducer of the disobedient ...

[Lines 39-106 are wanting. The positions of the fragmentary lines
supplied by duplicate fragments are uncertain; in any case they give
no connected sense.]

107. Verily, he holdeth the beginning and the end of them,[1]
verily ...

[Footnote 1: Compare the language of the Kur'ân (Surah II, v. 256),
"He (Allah) knoweth what is before them and what is behind them."]

108. Saying, "He who entered into the middle of Tiâmat resteth not;

109. "His name shall be 'Nibiru' the seizer of the middle.

110. "He shall set the courses of the stars of the heavens,

111. "He shall herd together the whole company of the gods like sheep.

112. "He shall [ever] take Tiâmat captive, he shall slit up her
treasure (variant, life), he shall disembowel her."[1]

[Footnote 1: These lines suggest that the fight between Marduk and
Tiâmat was recurrent; it is incorrect to translate the verbal forms as
preterites.]

113. Among the men who are to come after a lapse of time,

114. Let [these words] be heard without ceasing, may they reign to all
eternity,

115. Because he made the [heavenly] places and moulded the stable
[earth].

116. Father Bel proclaimed his name, "Lord of the Lands."

117. All the Igigi repeated the title.

118. Ea heard and his liver rejoiced,

119. Saying, "He whose title hath rejoiced his fathers

120. "Shall be even as I am; his name shall be Ea.

121. "He shall dispose of all the magical benefits of my rites,

122. "He shall make to have effect my instructions."

123. By the title of "Fifty times" the great gods

124. Proclaimed his names fifty times, they magnified his going.



EPILOGUE.

125. Let the first comer take them and repeat them;

126. Let the wise man and the learned man meditate upon all of them;

127. The father shall repeat them to his son that he may lay hold upon
them.

128. Let them (i.e., the names) open the ears of the shepherd and the
herdsman.[1]

[Footnote 1: "To open the ears"--to give understanding.]

129. Let [man] rejoice in Marduk, the Lord of the Gods,

130. That his land may be fertile and he himself abide in security.

131. His word is true, his command altereth not.

132. No god hath ever brought to the ground that which issueth from
his mouth.

133. They (i.e., the gods) treated him with contempt, he turned
not his back [in flight],

134. No god could resist his wrath at its height.

135. His heart is large, his bowels of mercy are great.

136. Of sin and wickedness before him ...

137. The first comer utters his complaint of humiliation before him.

[Lines 138-142 are too fragmentary to translate.]



NOTES.

1. There are in the British Museum several fragments of Neo-Babylonian
copies of the Seven Tablets of Creation, the exact position of which is
at present uncertain. One of these (S. 2013) is of some importance
because it speaks of one object which was in the "upper Tiâmat", and of
another which was in the "lower Tiâmat". This shows that the Babylonians
thought that one half of the body of Tiâmat, which was split up by
Marduk, was made into the celestial ocean, and the other half into the
terrestrial ocean, in other words, into "the waters that were above" and
"the waters that were beneath" the firmament respectively.

2. When George Smith published his _Chaldean Account of Genesis_
in 1876, he was of opinion that the Creation Tablets in the British
Museum contained descriptions of the Temptation of Eve by the serpent
and of the building and overthrow of the Tower of Babel.  The
description of Paradise in Genesis ii seems to show traces of
Babylonian influence, and the cylinder seal, Brit. Mus. No. 89,326,
was thought to be proof that a Babylonian legend of the Temptation
existed. In fact, George Smith printed a copy of the seal in his book
(p. 91). But it is now known that the tablet which was believed to
refer to man's eating of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge (K. 3, 473
+ 79-7-8, 296 + R. 615) describes the banquet of the gods to which
they invited Marduk. In like manner the text on K. 3657, which Smith
thought referred to the Tower of Babel, is now known to contain no
mention of a tower or building of any sort. It was also thought by him
that K. 3364 contained a set of instructions which God gave to Adam
and Eve after their creation, but it is now known and admitted by all
Assyriologists that the text on this tablet contains moral precepts
and has nothing to do with the Creation Series. Enquiries are from
time to time made at the Museum for tablets which deal with the
Temptation of Eve, and the destruction of the Tower of Babel, and the
Divine commands to Adam and Eve; it is perhaps not superfluous to say
that nothing of the kind exists.



LIST OF THE NAMES OF THE STARS OR SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC, WITH A LIST
SHOWING THE MONTH THAT WAS ASSOCIATED WITH EACH STAR IN THE PERSIAN
PERIOD.

BY SIDNEY SMITH, M.A., and C.J. GADD, M.A., Assistants in the Department.

No. 77,821 (85-4-30, 15).

       Determinative                                    Modern
Month.    of Star.    Name of the Sign of the Zodiac. Equivalent

[Cuneiform]                                           Goat.
[Cuneiform]                                           Bull.

[Cuneiform]                                           Twins.
[Cuneiform]                                           Crab.
[Cuneiform]                                           Lion.
[Cuneiform]                                           Virgin.
[Cuneiform]                                           Scales.
[Cuneiform]                                           Scorpion.
[Cuneiform]                                           Bow.
[Cuneiform]                                           Capricornus
[Cuneiform]                                           Water-bearer
[Cuneiform]                                           The Fishes.

Month.
|
|  Determinative of Star.
|  |
|  |          Name of the Sign on the Zodiac.
|  |          |
|  |          |
|  |          |
|  |          TRANSLITERATION.
|  |                TRANSLATION.
|  |
1  Nisannu    (kakkab) (amel) Agru....
                    The Labourer.

2  Airu          "     Kakkab u (kakkab) Alap shame
                    The Star and the Bull of heaven.

3  Simanu         "    Re'u kinu shame u (kakkab) tu'ame rabuti
                    The faithful shepherd of heaven and the Great Twins.

4  Duuzu          "    AL.LUL. (shittu)[1]....
                    The Tortoise.

5  Abu            "    Kalbu rabu....
                    Great Dog (Lion).

6  Ululu          "    Shiru....
                    Virgin with ear of corn.

7  Tashritum      "    Zibanitum....
                    ....

8  Arah shamna    "    Akrabu....
                    The Scorpion.

9  Kislimu        "    PA.BIL.SAG....
                    Enurta (the god).

10 Tebetum        "    SUHUR.MASH....
                    The Goat-fish.

11 Shabatu        "    Gula....
                    The Great Star

12 Addaru         "    DIL.GAN.u rikis nuni
                    The star ... and the Band of Fishes.

[Footnote 1: The Egyptian Sheta]


I have been assisted in the preparation of this monograph by
Mr. Sidney Smith, M.A., Assistant in the Department.

E.A. WALLIS BUDGE.

DEPARTMENT OF EGYPTIAN AND ASSYRIAN ANTIQUITIES, BRITISH MUSEUM.
_June_ 1, 1921.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Babylonian Legends of the Creation, by 
British Museum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BABYLONIAN LEGENDS OF THE CREATION ***

***** This file should be named 9914-8.txt or 9914-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/9/1/9914/

Produced by the PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rural Magazine, and Literary Evening
Fire-Side, Vol. 1 No. 8 (1820), by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Rural Magazine, and Literary Evening Fire-Side, Vol. 1 No. 8 (1820)

Author: Various

Release Date: April 24, 2015 [EBook #48775]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RURAL MAGAZINE ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note: Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

Small capital text has been replaced with all capitals.

Minor typographical and punctuation errors have been corrected
without note. Irregularities and inconsistencies in the text have
been retained as printed.

Mismatched quotes are not fixed if it's not sufficiently clear where
the missing quote should be placed.

The cover for the eBook version of this book was created by the
transcriber and is placed in the public domain.


       *       *       *       *       *




  THE

  RURAL MAGAZINE,

  AND

  LITERARY EVENING FIRE-SIDE.

  VOL. I. PHILADELPHIA, _Eighth Month, 1820_. _No. 8._




A FRIEND OF THE RURAL MAGAZINE TO ITS READERS.


There is nothing in which the honourable fame and steady prosperity
of our country, and the best interests of its inhabitants, are more
deeply involved, than in _the promotion of agriculture_. With one
hundred and twenty millions of acres of _cleared_, or _natural,
strong, unwooded_ land, and a population computed at nine millions
of persons, we have more soil already prepared for plantations,
farms and grazing, in proportion to our numbers, than any other
civilized people; and our capacities to add to our quantity of
cleared or unwooded land, extend to ten times the number of acres.
From the productions of these lands have our former happiness and
wealth arisen, and from the commerce and fabrication of these
productions, have our foreign and domestic trade, and all our home
manufactures, worth above two hundred millions of dollars, sprung
up. The merchants and manufacturers actually hold so real and great
a competition for the natural and agricultural productions of the
land, that none of these productions, capable of manufacture, were
exported even in the last year, except _cotton_, in the manufacture
of which we had made very great progress, in 1810; even without the
double and war duties, or those existing at this time. They were
supposed to be worth 15,000,000 of dollars in that year. The present
crisis, when all nations are revising and improving their systems of
agriculture, commerce and manufactures, appears to be a fit season
for increased attention, consideration and exertion on our part;
and first in the culture of the soil. It is proposed, as a suitable
object for such a work as _The Rural Magazine_, to make some of
those exertions in relation to _agriculture and the connected
subjects_, which are often demanded by those strong tides in human
life, which are dispensed to us in the course of divine Providence.
Pennsylvania, and the five other states which are contiguous to her,
making six in their whole number, contain about one hundred and
forty millions of acres of land in the most temperate and genial
_farming_ climates of our country. The southern parts of that noble
farming district even favours the cotton, the vine and the fig tree;
and every species of production, requiring the tone of the northern
part of the temperate zone for its growth or the fabrication of
those productions, is adapted to the higher latitudes of that
region of our country. The best culture of the eastern states is
comprehended in the proper farming of that district. The effectual
bearing of the productions of the south upon the profits of the
farming of the middle, northern and eastern states, will always
render the actual or new culture of our great southern district of
sugar, rice, indigo, cotton and grape vines, deeply important us;
because the cultivation of those and other productions, adapted to
their climates, will prevent their attention, as principal objects,
to those things which must always be produced by our cattle, grass,
apple, vegetable and grain farms. The cider and apple brandy, for
example, of the county of _Morris_, in New Jersey, which far exceeds
the general belief, the superfine flour of the white wheat country
of this middle district, and the fabrications of the dairy of the
eastern states, sustain no interference at home or abroad, from
the productions of those southern labourers who are employed on
sugar, rice, cotton, indigo and tobacco; or may be employed on the
fruit of the grape vine, the olive tree and their fabrications,
which annually yield to France one hundred and twenty millions of
dollars. The culture of the southern states is, therefore, in truth,
a fit subject of attention and solicitude for the Pennsylvanians,
and their surrounding northern and eastern brethren; and valuable
papers on that subject would always deserve a place in _The Rural
Magazine_. If the African TERENCE has been quoted, beyond any other
writer, for the beautiful exclamation of one of his personified
characters, "_Homo_ sum, et nihil humani a me alienum puto,"[1] how
impossible is it for a true and faithful member of this favoured
nation to forget to exclaim, "_Americanus_ sum, et nihil _Americani_
a me alienum puto."[2]

  [1] I am a _man_, and I consider nothing that affects _man_ as
  foreign to me.

  [2] I am an _American_, and I consider nothing that affects
  _America_ as foreign to me.

Some of the most important practices of agriculture belong to
all our climates. _Irrigation_, beautiful, elegant, profitable
_irrigation_, or the watering of grounds, by turning upon them
streams that have been wont to run waste, and pour their unused
vegetative powers into navigable rivers, is a great example. The
venerable and judicious ARTHUR YOUNG wrote to his compatriots
in England, from the districts of Piedmont and Milan, the best
irrigated parts of _the valley of the Po_, that such was the
perfection of that branch of agriculture and the connected branches
of working and neat cattle, dairies, rice, &c. that, excellent as
was their English system in his vicinity, his friends could have no
conception of perfection in farming, without visiting that part of
upper Italy. The orange trees are carefully irrigated in the kingdom
of Portugal, as are the vines of Madeira, and the rice in those
of our southern states which produce that wholesome, valuable and
delightful grain.

Let us, then, in every section of our country, keep attention on
the stretch _to improve our whole landed interest_, which, like our
great internal seas, our heaven dispensed lakes, is the natural
head, from which the sister streams of _commerce and manufactures_
are, unforcedly, to flow, and run till the end of time.




FOR THE RURAL MAGAZINE.

THE DESULTORY REMARKER.

No. VII.

     Travel in the younger sort is a part of education; in the elder
     a part of experience.

  _Bacon._


In pursuance of the plan proposed in the initial number of these
papers, which, although a mortifying consideration to the pride
of authorship, it is quite probable many of my readers have
already forgotten; I shall, on the present occasion, avail myself
of one of the sources of instruction and gratification there
indicated--foreign travel. The friend to whom I am indebted for the
following remarkable incidents, illustrative of the present state
of morals in Italy, has not long since returned from a tour through
England, France, Italy, Switzerland, and part of Germany; with
an increased attachment for his native country and her admirable
institutions.

He left Milan for Florence, passing through the towns of Lodi,
Plazenza, Parma, and Bologna, where he arrived after eight days
journeying. Among the passengers in the coach with him, was a young
gentleman of Rome, the Cavaliere V----, who was returning home after
a two years tour in _South_ America and Europe. Between these two,
as those who are strangers in any part of the world, particularly
when travelling together, experience a community of privation and
enjoyment, an intimacy was soon formed. The distance from Florence
to Rome is 193 English miles. The road passes over the Appenine
mountains, and by the tardy mode of travelling peculiar to the
country, there being no public coaches, it requires six days. The
highways in this neighbourhood are infested with banditti of the
most ferocious character, and almost every day furnishes accounts
of robberies and murders. On the 5th of January, 1819, they left
Florence. The first three days were marked by no striking incident,
but on the morning of the fourth, about dawn, their ears were
accosted with a sudden discharge of fire-arms close to the carriage,
which they soon found to proceed from the carbines of banditti.
Previously to quitting Milan, our friend had taken the precaution to
divide his gold, carrying part of it about his person, enveloped in
a bandana handkerchief in the form of a belt, and the remainder in
a portmanteau. He had also a number of Bank of England notes, which
he carried in his pocket-book, with his passport, &c. The bandana
soon attracted their attention, and its contents, 30 Napoleons, with
his purse, &c. fell into their hands. His portmanteau being securely
lashed to the imperial, escaped the plunderers, as well as his watch
and pocket-book. It was within a league of Montifiascone where the
attack was made. The robbers were interrupted in the height of their
villainy, by the tramp of approaching horses, which proved to be the
neighbouring peasantry commencing their daily toils; and retreated
with precipitation to the impenetrable thickets of the Appenines.
The travellers then proceeded on their journey to Rome, without
experiencing further molestation.

On their arrival there, our countryman congratulated himself on his
good fortune in having become acquainted with the Cavaliere V----,
whose politeness and attentions were particularly grateful; and
as Rome was the place of his residence, every object of interest
and curiosity to be found there, was perfectly familiar to him. He
introduced his American acquaintance to his father, who was a man of
rank, living in splendour and opulence; and to his sisters, whose
society the latter felt every disposition to cultivate. Thus various
circumstances appeared to combine to render pleasant a residence in
this celebrated metropolis, and to aid him in his contemplations
among the remaining monuments of her former magnificence and power.

One morning having a leisure hour on his hands, our townsmen was
engaged in his chamber counting his money, in order to ascertain the
extent of his loss, sustained by the unwelcome visiters who had paid
him their respects on the road; when the Cavaliere unceremoniously
entered the room, and seeing a pocket-book in his hand, immediately
inquired what he had lost. The fact was, that a 20 pound note of
the Bank of England was missing, and as the pocket-book in which
the notes were contained, was not discovered by the banditti, in
their haste to make their escape, he concluded that it had been
carelessly dropped at some time or other, and would never again be
heard of; which he stated at once to his pseudo friend. The latter
expressed some surprise, and evinced considerable embarrassment
on the occasion. His quondam fellow tourist, however, made light
of the matter, and endeavoured to change the conversation by
stating, that he would ask the advice of his banker the duke of
Torlonia, fortunately the only house in the habit of discounting
English notes; and would also write to his banker in London, to
have the payment stopped at the Bank of England. To this plan the
Cavaliere strenuously objected, but said, that he knew a man in
Rome, who would procure him the note if it was to be found; and in
consequence of this suggestion, the application to the Duke was
not made. Our traveller, reflecting on the circumstances connected
with this interview, his being interrogated as to his loss before
any intimation had been given that such loss had been sustained,
the hurried and peculiar manner in which the inquiries were made,
in addition to the fact that the Cavaliere was the only person
who had seen them counted, and that he was careless of locking up
his pocket-book, began to suspect, although his rank and standing
might forbid it, that the gentleman knew something about the note.
As the numbers of the different bills had been taken, there could
not readily have been a mistake. A few days subsequently it was
distinctly intimated, that the person to whom application had been
made, knew where the note was. An interview with the _conjurer_ was
zealously urged, in the hope of visiting the thief with merited
punishment. To this the Cavaliere replied, that he had pledged his
honour that the affair should remain in profound secrecy, and that
he would himself be responsible for the payment, and accordingly
gave his note of hand for it payable in two days! After _many_
days had elapsed without receiving the amount, the patience of
our traveller was nearly exhausted, and under the influence of
irritation, produced by the unprincipled conduct of this modern
Roman, it was determined to disclose the whole transaction to his
father. The subject was introduced with the utmost delicacy. The old
gentleman, after hearing a detail of all the circumstances, coolly
observed, that it was no business of his, and that his son would
doubtless attend to it. He was then explicitly told, that respect
for his supposed parental feelings had induced the reserve which he
had witnessed; but as this reserve, it was perfectly apparent, was
altogether unnecessary, the facts of the case should be made known,
and the moral turpitude of his son publicly exposed.--The expression
of this determination caused an immediate change of tone and manner;
he was now all sensibility to the reputation of his son and that
of his family, and gave a positive assurance that the money should
be immediately forthcoming. Shortly after this conversation it was
brought by his quondam friend, and was principally in various gold
coins, which had probably been procured for him by a broker, on the
lowest terms.

The family, in which our countryman resided, while at Rome, was
highly agreeable; and the society of the lady, and her amiable
daughters, was a source of pleasure to the gentlemen who lived
in the house. On the evening of the day on which this affair was
settled, he had taken his wonted seat in this interesting circle,
which so delightfully reminded him of that which he had left at
home, when the brother of the Cavaliere, who was invested with
some office of dignity, entered in full dress. He very courteously
and gracefully paid his respects to all the individuals composing
the company, with the exception of the American, of whom,
notwithstanding his being well acquainted with him, he took no
notice whatever. He then intimated to the lady of the house, that
he wished to speak with her in private. She accordingly withdrew,
and very soon afterwards returned, and informed our tourist, that
the gentleman desired to see him in the adjoining room. On entering,
he was charged with attempting to sully the character of a family,
which could trace its reputation and fame through a long line of
noble ancestry; and that for this injustice, instant reparation
should be made. He then drew his sword in a tempest of passion,
but recollecting immediately, that his antagonist was unarmed, he
sheathed it, and drew from his pocket a pair of pistols, with which
he insisted they should fight without delay. By this time one of
the party, alarmed by the noise occasioned by their altercation,
hurried into the room, and on learning the cause which produced it,
gave such explanations to the enraged Italian as were acknowledged
to be perfectly satisfactory, as to the treatment his brother had
received; and with a smile, which he could assume at pleasure,
he took his leave. After his departure, the lady took occasion to
caution our traveller against venturing out during the evening,
assigning as a reason for this advice, that the officer was very
vindictive in his disposition, and that an Englishman, who had not
long previously given him some offence, lost his life in consequence
of the attack of an assassin. This admonition was not disregarded.
In the course of the evening, a member of the family, who had heard
nothing of the previous occurrences, on his return home, observed,
that he could not conceive what mischief was in agitation, as his
face had been closely examined by more than one person, in passing
the lamps, who wore masks, and appeared to be actuated by curiosity,
or some other motive, to an extraordinary degree. Those who were
acquainted with the events of the evening, were at no loss to
conjecture for whom they were on the watch. An obnoxious individual
can at any time be put out of the way, in Rome, for a very small
reward. To save these obliging and tender-hearted gentry further
trouble, and to consult his own safety, he early the next morning
left the dominions of the church, and pursued his journey to Naples.

If individuals, and incidents of such a character, should frequently
present themselves to the notice of the tourist, it would almost
induce him to deny himself the delights and advantages of foreign
travel, and adopt this sentiment of COWLEY,

    _About the spacious world let others roam,
    The voyage life, is longest made at home._
                                               ☞



FOR THE RURAL MAGAZINE.

THE VILLAGE TEACHER.


Twice in every year our otherwise quiet village is thrown into a
ferment, which agitates its little community like an earthquake,
and unsettles all the habits of order and industry for which we are
usually remarkable. The cause of this great tumult is the militia
training--that system which supposes every citizen to be a soldier,
and undertakes to instruct him in the art and mystery of holding a
musket and putting the right foot foremost. On the last of these
occasions, I was surprised to find that my whole school had played
truant; and observing an unusual ferment in the streets, found,
upon inquiry, that at the last election for officer, Ezekiel Snip,
the village tailor, a man with fierce red whiskers and a peculiar
altitude of chin, had been elected captain. Ezekiel had dipt into
Duane's Hand-Book, and was esteemed profoundly skilled in the
manual exercise; so that the neighbours were all on the tiptoe of
expectation to witness the parade of the day. As this took place
opposite to my school-room, I seated myself quietly at the window
to watch how matters proceeded. About eight o'clock, the tavern
porch began to be filled with people, some bringing old rusty
rifles, others their fowling pieces, and some armed with a stout
oaken stick. Then sallied forth a valiant drummer, aided by a no
less valiant fifer, at the head of some dozens of the town boys,
to alarm the village. They marched up the street, and down the
street, and beat tantarara, and whistled out of all tune,--till my
head ached,--to the infinite delight of the idle urchins at their
heels, and the gaping housemaids at the doors and windows, as they
passed. When this preparatory ceremony was gone through, forth
issued captain Snip from the tavern door, in all the glory of a blue
coat, epaulettes, a sword and feather. The militia-men were then
ranged out in ranks, and the muster-roll called. I was particularly
struck with the assemblage present. I looked in vain for the most
respectable of our mechanics and neighbouring farmers.--The ranks
were chiefly filled with the idle young men of the village and the
tavern frequenters of the neighbourhood; in short, with men who
hung loose upon society, and were eager for every adventure that
would enable them to get through a day, without work, and might
end in a drinking match. Captain Snip bustled about with becoming
self-importance,--fixed this man six inches back, and that one
as much forward, and having thus ranged them _a la militaire_,
proceeded, by the aid of his Hand-Book, to induct them into the
manual exercise. At the word "Shoulder fire-locks," a scene of
confusion ensued. Some had their pieces on the right and some
on the left shoulder, and they were ranged at all angles from a
perpendicular to a horizontal line.--With infinite difficulty, and
after repeated trials, the captain got them to order and proceeded
to the next command. As he went on I observed that he became
impatient and confused; the disorder into which his company were
continually getting, surpassed his abilities to rectify, and his
limited and superficial knowledge began to fail him. He quite lost
his authority over his men; but by dint of storming, succeeded
at last in getting some how through the business. The drum then
sounded, and the gallant troop marched out to the commons, there to
encamp for the day, carrying in their train all the noisy and idle
boys of the town.

In the afternoon they again made their appearance, dusty, fatigued,
and disorderly, and after a sham exercise in the street, were
dismissed. It was a glorious day for the sellers of cakes, and
beer, and brandy, and whiskey. Many a bottle that day was emptied
of its fiery contents, and many a miserable wretch strengthened in
the habits of vice and dissipation. Scarce a man of this valiant
corps returned home sober. The tavern door was a scene of continued
quarrelling and the most shocking profanity, till eleven o'clock.

Battle succeeded battle, to the infinite diversion of the
by-standers, and to the edification and instruction of the lads of
all sizes that were thronging to this school of morality. I know not
how captain Snip felt upon descending to his ordinary employment,
from such a height of military glory, but I myself have been sad and
melancholy ever since, when I reflected upon the events of the day.

And what, fellow citizens, is the great good attained by these
militia trainings? It is the idlest of idle dreams to suppose
the recurrence, four times in the year, of such scenes as I have
described, can make soldiers of our yeomanry. It may make idlers,
it may make bullies, and drunkards, and gamblers of them; but what
they learn of military discipline, of the subordination of a camp,
is not worth a farthing candle. You lose to the state the labour of
a hundred thousand men, that they may be placed under the tuition
of some half-learned captain, who, perhaps, has never been in a
camp, and who does not, in the course of years, teach them more than
they could at any time learn as well and better in half a day's
real service. The good done to the state by these militia laws is
a mere shadow, and the wounds which they inflict upon the steady
habits, the industry and the morality of the country, are awful and
portentous. I believe I do not exceed probability in asserting, that
one half of the drunkenness in the state, is induced or confirmed at
these militia trainings.

But it is not only in the effects upon those who obey the mandate
of the law, that this system is to be deprecated. Look at it,
in what light you will, it is injurious and oppressive. A large
portion of your fellow citizens are men who will not, in any cause,
take the life or connive at the death of a fellow creature. They
believe that the great Author of being retains in his own hand the
power over life, and that it is impious in mortals to assume his
prerogative.--No matter how true or false this may be, it is with
them an article of religious faith, and as such is held sacred by
our constitution. Whatever law interferes with this article of
their belief is, to them, persecution. If man has no moral right
to take the life of his fellow, government can have no moral right
to oblige him to do it; and they who obey the law, in preference
to their conscience, are traitors to their God. If they obey your
military requisition, they become a party to a system altogether
at variance with their faith. They cannot pay the fines which you
impose for their refusal, for you demand them as an equivalent for
what they cannot concede to you. Here then are they placed, without
(according to their belief) the power of moving. If you insist upon
the payment, you must despoil them of their goods. It is to be sure
alleged, that the state cannot, with a due regard to its own safety,
dispense with the military allegiance of its citizens. Admit this
to be the case. Do you, in abstaining from the petty, alienating
vexations of a militia law in time of peace, yield or forego the
claim to this allegiance? You pass an edict oppressive to a class
of citizens, whose motive for non-compliance is sacred in the eye
of the constitution,--an edict, which your experience of the past
assures you, they will not comply with, and you create, in order
to enforce it, a race of harpies, who are trained under it in all
the arts of oppression and plunder. And to what good end? Does one
solitary dollar of these militia exactions pass into your treasury?
Is it not, on the contrary, a well known fact, that after seizing
upon twice or thrice the just amount of the claim, the proceeds
of the sale of these goods melt away before they reach the public
treasury? The ostensible object of the law is to train the yeomenry
in the art of war. My word for it, its actual operation is more
to enervate than to strengthen, and while it forms a dark blot on
the escutcheon of our state, there is not, in its consequences, a
single salutary effect to compensate for the hardships it inflicts
upon the followers of the great statesman, who laid the foundations
of our public and private prosperity, our liberal institutions; of
all, in short, which has rendered Pennsylvania the boast and the
envy of nations.




FOR THE RURAL MAGAZINE.

ROUTE TO NIAGARA PALLS.


_To the Editors._--During the continuance of the fervid season, some
of your readers will probably beguile the tedium of mid-summer, by
taking excursions in various directions, as health or curiosity may
happen to invite them. The gratification to be derived from pursuing
the route to NIAGARA FALLS, and thence to Montreal and Quebec, will
amply repay all its fatigues, and realise the expectations of the
tourist however highly excited. The following indicates one of the
most agreeable avenues of approach to that unparalleled wonder of
Nature. Having felt the want of some such information myself, it
was thought it might be acceptable to others, who have no better
guide. These distances, though derived principally from innkeepers,
stage-drivers, &c. are sufficiently accurate for the purposes of
travellers generally.

  _Distance from Philadelphia to the Falls._

                                    Miles.
  New York,                          100
  Albany,                            160
                                    ---- 260
  Schenectady,                        16
  Amsterdam,                          15
  Tripe's Hill,                        6
  Cachnewaga,                          5
  Paletine,                           18
  St. Johnsville,                      4
  Manheim,                             3
                                    ---- 327
     Little Falls,                     7
     Herkimer,                         7
     Utica,                           15
  1st day's journey from Albany,    ----  96
     Vernon,                          16
     Lennox,                          12
     Chetenengo,                       5
     Manlius,                         12
     Jamesville,                       5
     Onondaga,                        10
     Skaneatelis,                     16
  2d day's journey from Albany,     ----  76
     Auburn,                           7
     Canandaigua,                     37
  3d day's journey from Albany,     ----  44
     Victor,                          10
     Pittsford,                       11
     Rochester,                        9
     Palma,                           11
     Murray,                           7
     Gaines,                          11
  4th day's journey from Albany,    ----  59
     Ridgway,                         13
     Hartland,                        11
     Cambray,                         12
     Lewistown,                       15
     FALLS OF NIAGARA,                 7
                                    ----  58
                                        ----
                                         593

  _From the Falls to Quebec._

     Lewistown,                       7
     Fort George,                     7
     YORK,                           33
     Kingston,                      170
     Prescott,                       70
     La Chine,                      130
     Montreal,                        9
     QUEBEC,                        170
                                   ----  596

  _From Quebec to Philadelphia._

     Montreal,                      170
     St. John's,                     27
     Shoreham,                      150
     Ticonderoga, (village)           3
     Caldwell,                       35
     Albany,                         61
     New York,                      160
     PHILADELPHIA,                  100
                                   ----  706

This journey may be readily accomplished in about four weeks,
without extraordinary haste, at an expense of from one to two
or three hundred dollars; according to the mode of travelling
adopted, and the habits of the tourist in relation to economy or
extravagance. But in times like the present, even those who are
wealthy, should be edifying examplars of simplicity and frugality.

  OSCAR.




FOR THE RURAL MAGAZINE.

EXTRACTED FROM THE MANUSCRIPT COLLECTIONS OF C. E.

     _A remarkable instance of premonition of impending death._


Your readers may rely on the authenticity of what follows, as I
assure them I copied it myself from the original letter in the well
known hand writing of John Ross, Esq. deceased, who was an eminent
attorney at law in this city, for many years before the American
revolution, and also a member of the legislature, as a number still
living can remember. The letter was addressed to his friend Dr.
Cadwalader Evans, of this city, but then settled for a few years in
the Island of Jamaica. The accident happened to John Kinsey, Jun. He
was the son of John Kinsey, Esq., one of the most eminent lawyers
of his time, also speaker of the Assembly and chief justice of the
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.

  C. E.


DEAR DR. EVANS,

I am going for Newcastle, early in the morning. I just heard of a
vessel going to Jamaica before my return; so in haste determine to
give you one scrawl, lest you should think the neighbourhood forget
you. But you may depend that will never happen: we gratefully and
cordially remember you often. I would tell you all the news in a
word, if possible, with all haste. To begin--our neighbourhood
just as you left us, only B. Franklin lives in your house. The
Col. Hellier not yet gone to sea. I think all your acquaintance
continue well, save poor Johnny Kinsey, jun. on Tuesday, the 8th
inst. by accident shot himself dead, coming over Gray's ferry, by
Schuylkill falls, while in the boat. He had loaded his gun, and, as
is supposed, let the butt drop on the bottom of the flat, the gun
in a line with his body by his side; went off when half cocked. The
whole load of shot struck his left cheek, and went up directly into
his brain. He dropped and was dead in an instant--never groaned.
Great sorrow attended his father, and all his friends, for the
accident. He had strange apparitions of his death the night before,
which he informed his aunt Bowene of at breakfast, the morning of
the accident. I must relate to you the particulars which are as true
as surprising. He, talking with his aunt at breakfast concerning
his being admitted as an attorney and going into business, said,
he believed he had nothing to do with business, for his time, he
thought, was not long in this world. He said that last night he
was strangely disturbed in his sleep with dreams and apparitions;
that his cousin Charles Pemberton, who died last spring, appeared
to him, wrapped in a sheet, and said to him, "Kinsey, your time
approaches, you must go with me," and he disappeared. Soon after,
appeared a person before him in the form of an angel, (according
to the idea he had of an angel) and said to him "Kinsey, your hour
is come, you must go with me," and instantly he thought a flash of
lightning struck him on the cheek and he instantly died. This was
followed by a severe clap of thunder and lightning that awaked him
from his sleep, and all those particulars came fresh to his memory,
and gave him a great uneasiness. (Note--no thunder or lightning that
night.)--Upon this he endeavoured to get asleep again, and after
dozing a short time, he was awaked by the noise of a person walking
across the room, giving a heavy groan. He heard or saw no more, but
got out of bed and went into the other room, called the Scotch boy
to bring in his bed and lay by him the remainder of the night. In
the morning, at breakfast, on Tuesday last, he communicated all the
before related to his aunt Bowene and Hannah Kearney. He seemed much
dejected upon it, was confident he was near his end; but to divert
himself for that day, he determined to take his gun and go fowling
with young J. Derborow, young Oxley, and two or three more. They
walked to Coultas' ferry and crossed Schuylkill, and up to the falls
ferry. He told the company several times, as they walked, he wished
no accident might befall him before he got home. On their return,
crossing the ferry in the boat, the unhappy accident happened him.
Thus you have the particulars of this melancholy affair, as fully
as I could relate it if with you, and I chose to be particular in
it, because I have met with no story in history so well attested as
this concerning the premonitions from heaven of our dissolution.
The flash that struck his cheek when asleep, was clearly answered
by the flash of the gun and the shot thereof first striking. His
aunt laboured to persuade him not to go a gunning that day, and he
agreed; but afterwards meeting his company, they prevailed with him,
as they had all agreed to go the night before.

Your father and all friends are well. I sincerely wish you all
imaginable felicity, and with all the haste I began, I cannot help
now concluding that I am your very affectionate friend and humble
servant,

  JOHN ROSS.

  Dr. Cadwalader Evans, St. Anns, Jamaica.

  _Philad. Sunday Evening_, }
  _13 Nov. 1748._           }




FOR THE RURAL MAGAZINE.

FIRMITY AND HOMINY.


There are two ancient very wholesome and pleasant dishes, which are
much used in the states south of Pennsylvania, to which the middle
and northern states have not yet paid sufficient attention. The
first called FIRMITY, is made of WHEAT. The second, called HOMINY,
is made of INDIAN CORN, or MAIZE. The grains of wheat and Indian
corn are prepared by beating in the same manner in a wooden mortar,
with an iron pestle, filed in crosses or ridges at the bottom, like
a modern stamp or seal for letters.

To make the firmity mortar, or hominy mortar, select a tree of from
two feet to two feet and one half in diameter. Cut off a length (or
piece as nearly as possible cylindrical) of about the height of a
man's waistband from the ground. Let an iron hoop be well secured
on and around each of the ends, to bind and keep the wood together.
Then make a hole at each end of this cut of wood, like the cavity
of a common mortar, as wide as the wood will admit, at top, and
narrowing to a blunt point at the bottom. Both cavities are to be
made alike, so that in fact, in the one cylindrical piece of wood,
there will be two mortars; one in and at each end. These may be
used indiscriminately for wheat or firmity, or for Indian corn or
hominy, and will occasion the utensil to last longer.--It will be
proper not to have the bottoms of the two mortars, or mortar holes,
so deep as to endanger the driving a hole from one into the other,
which would destroy the use of both. When the mortar is thus well
made, a moderate quantity of wheat, to make firmity, is to be put
into the mortar, in the upper part, as it stands on the end, and the
grain is to be moistened with a little warm water, to make the skin
or bran come off easily and perfectly, by the beating. The pestle
is then to be used by a man so as, by striking in among the grains
of wheat, from the top to the bottom of the parcel, from time to
time, and repeatedly, to skin the grains of wheat, which it will do
effectually. When this is done, the grains are to be separated from
the hulls or bran, by a sieve large enough to let the wheat through
and keep out the bran or skin. When this has been done, the parcel
is spread to dry, on a clean coarse linen or cotton cloth. The
proper quantity is put into a large family pot, with a sufficient
quantity of water to boil it, and to be evaporated by a steady
simmering heat from 8 or 9 in the evening till 9 or 10 next morning.
Thus the firmity will be made into a large mass of white mixture of
paste or pulp of wheat, and of whole wheat. This is to be taken out
in portions, as wanted to make a mess, boiled with skim or common
milk, as thick as pea-soup or rice-milk, and sweetened to the taste.
A small lump of butter, of the size of a nutmeg, is often put into
the tureen or soup-dish of firmity, at the moment when it is served
up hot. Some use a little nutmeg and a very little salt. Firmity
is used after the meat meal, which need be but small when there is
firmity for dinner, for it is a very hearty and pleasant food. At
supper there is no occasion for meat.

Hominy is prepared in like manner, except that it is served up
without milk, and that it is diluted moderately with hot water. A
little butter and salt may be added; and on following days hominy
is often fried in a large cake to the size of the pan.--Hominy, in
every form and state, is very good with the gravy of roasted beef,
mutton, lamb, and poultry, steaks, chops, and cutlets.

It is believed, that wheat and Indian corn are much more wholesome
in firmity and hominy, than in bread or _pone_. No yeast is
required.--Great quantities of grain might be used in this way.
Every thing that employs our grain, which is becoming redundant, is
an object worthy of consideration and attention. A great number of
the best living and most expensive families in Philadelphia, from
Maryland, Delaware, and Virginia, use hominy and firmity with the
greatest relish; and if suitable mortars were sent thither for sale,
the use of this food would increase.




FOR THE RURAL MAGAZINE.


Weeds, and larger growths, which interfere with cultivation or
impoverish the ground, should be cut down or pulled up, _before the
seed ripens_, in August, which prevents their growing in a following
year. Weeds are the successful rivals of grain, garden vegetables,
and grass.

Now is the BUILDING season. All our country houses and places
for work, should be built on the south and west sides of swamps,
marshes, ponds, and other fresh waters, _on account of health_; and
not on the north or east sides of any such wet or watery places. The
summer winds blow from the south and west, and carry the unwholesome
vapours, exhaled from those fresh waters, from places on their south
and west sides, to places on the north and east sides, preserving
the people's health.

WHITE COVERS of linen, cotton, or even paper, to the hats of people
working in the fields, fishing, fowling, travelling, &c. protect
them from morbid or sickening strokes of the sun. This is an old
practice among the judicious Swiss.

Now, when all the waters are becoming low, we should observe the
places for tapping swamps, marshes, and ponds. By cutting a drain to
draw off the water in its low state, in August, we begin to reclaim
our lands from the marsh and swamp.--The ground becomes firmer to
haul off the wood and timber in the cutting season. Wet grounds
should be drained, before they are cleared of their wood. For, if
they are freed from trees, _in their wet state_, the sun produces
sickening and often fatal evaporations. This is true in France,
Germany, Holland, and the marshy parts of England, though several
degrees further north than the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dry Rot._--This destructive enemy of building, which generally
commences its ravages in the cellars, may be prevented or checked,
by whitewashing them yearly, mixing copperas with it to give it a
yellow hue.




Communicated for the Rural Magazine.

ABSTRACTS

     From the IVth volume of the Memoirs of the Philadelphia
     Agricultural Society; Richard Peters, President; Wm. Tilghman,
     James Mease, George Logan and Robert Coleman, Vice Presidents;
     Roberts Vaux, Secretary.


1. The SESAMUM ORIENTALE or BE-NE, written BENE, for making oil of
the seed, from Bengal, Africa, Georgia, and the Mississippi. See
Archives of Useful Knowledge, by Dr. Mease; Encyclopædia Britanica;
Accounts of East India Agriculture, &c. It is planted in the end of
April and gathered in the end of September, in 32° N. lat.; raised
also in 34° 50' N. lat. The oil is fine for salad, and all the other
uses of _olive_ oil, and may be extracted, as is the flax-seed oil,
or by boiling water, to the top of which it will rise, and may be
skimmed, and bottled or put into casks. It is very common on the
west coast of Africa, and grows to most advantage on poor, sandy
hills. It is said never to become rancid, but to improve with age.
[Letter of Thomas M. Forman, Esq. Rose Hill, near Savington, Cecil,
Md.] In the same letter is an account of Napoleon or Crawford RYE.
It is described to grow very tall, having a solid stalk, probably
capable of resisting the fly, like Jethro Tull's solid-stalked
wheat. This grain is said to improve in the Cecil county soil and
climate.

2. Plan of FENCES of living trees for posts, such as the Sugar
Maple, and _wire_ for rails; by White & Hazard, Whitestown,
Philadelphia county, lowest falls of Schuylkill. Common fence for
100 acres, for 50 years, costs $3,080. Do. of wire fence for 50
years, costs $1,751. Add profit on trees, such as American black
Walnut, curled or sugar Maple, Mulberry, Apple, (244 trees producing
annually, at one dollar, $244) Buttonwoods, &c. which the projectors
make to produce $14,098, in fifty years. Interest on annual produce
sufficient to keep such wire and live-tree fence in repair, from
the time of completion for ever. Other orchard lands can be spared.
These fences are good against the worst cows;--they are easy to
repair. Inquire at R. Watkin's tavern, at the falls of Schuylkill.

3. Accounts of LIME and KILNS, and cooking STOVES, in Spain; by
Anthony Morris, Esq. formerly of Philadelphia, now of Bucks county,
Pennsylvania, A. D. 1816.--In burning lime, the Spanish peasants
use only the small Shrub or brush wood, not larger than a man's
little finger to the size of a pipe stem. The kiln is like ours in
Whitemarsh, &c. except that the top of the kiln is very little above
the surface of the ground, and is covered with clay to confine the
heat. The arch within is of such height as to give the full benefit
of all the flame of those dry, light materials. The Spanish lime,
like our best Pennsylvania lime, is very good. The Spanish practice
is recommended, where lime stone is plenty, wood scarce, and brush,
trash and weeds so abundant as to impede or injure culture. In the
same letter is a cheap method, as to fuel, for heating irons; and an
economical kitchen, as to fire, for cooking.

4. A letter from Mr. Jefferson, concerning the success of the
GYPSUM, or Plaster of Paris, in Albemarle, Virginia, 200 miles from
the sea-coast; also concerning improved hill ploughing, by his
ingenious son-in-law, Col. Thomas M. Randolph.[3]

  [3] See the engraving of Col. Randolph's Hill-side Plough, page 18,
  vol. IV. Philadelphia Agricultural Society's Memoirs.

5. An American Plough, approved in England; as is our Cradling
Scythe.

6. Also, further notice of the Mangel Wurtzel, for the culture of
which see the Philadelphia Society's Memoirs, vol. III. Seed of a
new kind, called the orange-coloured Mangel Wurtzel, has been sent
to President Peters by Robert Barclay, Esq. grandson to the old
Apologist of Uri. The progress in the culture of this root, in Great
Britain, is great. Mr. Peters thinks the mottled kind best, and
recommends the greatest care as to seed. It appears in other parts
of this volume that 60 to 90 tons of Mangel Wurtzel, or Scarcity
Root, or the improved Beet, have been produced by an acre.

5. In pages 107, 108, 109 and 110, are some interesting notices of
the Mangel Wurtzel, or Scarcity or Beet root, by Mr. Isaac C. Jones,
of Philadelphia. It appears that this gentleman was led into some
experiments, after an entire city occupation of 20 years, by reading
some interesting accounts of such experiments in the European books.
In April, 1816, a piece of ground, not quite one fifth of an acre,
was planted with the seeds, in parallel rows, of two feet three or
four inches one way, by one foot the other. On gathering the crop in
November, 1816, it was found that it weighed 8180 pounds, and that
the weight of the leaves, pulled off from those roots, at different
times through the season, was 5,595 pounds. They would have been
more, but as the season of 1816 was uncommonly dry, the pulling was
omitted for some weeks. This plant is very valuable for farm stock,
and _most so for milch cows_. The leaves are excellent through the
summer, and the cut or chopped root through the winter, when dry
food is used. The Mangel Wurtzel, or Scarcity root or improved Beet,
is excellent for the table, and is preferred by Mr. Jones' family
to the red or garden beets, which are abundant and very fine in the
Philadelphia market. The same gentleman raised in 1816, on 23 square
poles (23/160ths of an acre,) 110 bushels of the long or orange
Carrot root, being at the rate of nearly 800 bushels to the acre. A
bushel of those Carrots (cut with an approved instrument in the form
of an S) weighed 47 lbs., and a bushel of the Mangel Wurtzel, cut
in like manner, weighed 55 lbs. The Carrots produced 800 bushels,
and the Mangel Wurtzel, at this rate, 900 bushels to the acre, each
_in the uncut state_. As he planted the Mangel Wurtzel, Mr. Jones
found it easy to dress with the plough and one horse. The Carrots,
when up, require the hoe and the hand altogether. It appears, that
the seeds of this plant, about which the utmost care is necessary,
may be had of John S. Skinner, Esq. Baltimore, and Mr. M'Mahon,
Philadelphia, and of the seedsmen in New York, Hartford, Boston,
&c. The Mangel Wurtzel fell into some disrepute in England, about
the year 1810, but the marchioness of Salisbury revived it. It
was introduced into Ireland, in 1787, by seed from Dr. Letsom, of
London, but the good qualities not being known, nor the culture, it
fell into disuse in Ireland also. But a machine for the planting
of it was invented by Mr. Edward Linsey, and now it is extensively
cultivated there and much approved. The leaves produce two or more
crops in the north of Ireland in summer and autumn, and those
leaves and the roots in winter are deemed excellent for milch and
beef cattle, in that great butter country. Irish sowing time is
April and May. Preparation the same as for turnips and potatoes:
two drills to be opened two feet apart; sufficient dung to be used,
according to the state and quality of the ground. Then cover the
dung with the double mould board plough, at once, or the single
plough at twice, by ridging them up as high as can be well done,
with a man shovelling between the drills, right and left, smoothing
the surface of the dung, which will leave the ridge about a space of
ten or twelve inches broad. This complete method of fallowing will
repay the trouble of shovelling, by raising a full proportion of
earth under the roots. When the ground is thus completely prepared,
two boys or girls can sow from two to three acres per day. After
sowing, it should be well rolled, which completes the process.

The crop is afterwards to be treated in the same manner as turnips
or potatoes, by putting to and taking off mould, &c. After the roots
have been raised, the ground is in fine order for wheat or any other
crop.

_Example of Cultivation._--Wolf M'Neil, Esq. Ireland, sowed one
acre; from the leaves, fed 40 pigs through the seasons of last
summer and fall; then gathered 84 tons of roots.--On these fed nine
cows and five calves during winter, and had, on 22d April, 1815,
eight tons remaining, besides 100 roots, which he transplanted for
securing good seed, _an all-important object_ in this culture.

(To be continued.)

     [We recommend to our readers the purchase and study of "_The
     Code of Agriculture_," written by Sir John Sinclair, the first
     president of the _public_ British Board of Agriculture. London
     edition, about 612 pages in one octavo volume; also, American
     Hartford edition, Connecticut. It is probably the first farmer's
     manual, or _handbook_, extant in our language, and was concocted
     by the labours of 26 years, and with the aid of 1000 persons.]




_Valuable Breed of Cattle._
