Project Gutenberg’s The Romance Of Tristan And Iseult, by M. Joseph Bédier

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Romance Of Tristan And Iseult

Author: M. Joseph Bédier

Release Date: December 3, 2004 [EBook #14244]
Last Updated: October 31, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANCE OF TRISTAN AND ISEULT ***




Produced by Jeffrey Kraus-yao





THE ROMANCE OF TRISTAN AND ISEULT

The Romance of Tristan & Iseult Drawn from the best French Sources and
Retold by J. Bédier Rendered into English by H. Belloc

London: George Allen & Company, Ltd. Ruskin House, Rathbone Place.
Mcmxiii

[All rights reserved]

“Le Roman de Tristan et Iseut,” by M. Joseph Bédier, was crowned by
the French Academy

Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co.

at the Ballantyne Press, Edinburgh


CONTENTS

PART THE FIRST

The Childhood of Tristan
The Morholt out of Ireland
The Quest of the Lady with the Hair of Gold
The Philtre
The Tall Pine-Tree
The Discovery
The Chantry Leap

PART THE SECOND

The Wood of Morois
Ogrin the Hermit
The Ford
The Ordeal by Iron

PART THE THIRD

The Little Fairy Bell
Iseult of the White Hands
The Madness of Tristan
The Death of Tristan


PART THE FIRST

THE CHILDHOOD OF TRISTAN

My lords, if you would hear a high tale of love and of death, here is
that of Tristan and Queen Iseult; how to their full joy, but to their
sorrow also, they loved each other, and how at last they died of that
love together upon one day; she by him and he by her.

Long ago, when Mark was King over Cornwall, Rivalen, King of Lyonesse,
heard that Mark’s enemies waged war on him; so he crossed the sea to
bring him aid; and so faithfully did he serve him with counsel and
sword that Mark gave him his sister Blanchefleur, whom King Rivalen
loved most marvellously.

He wedded her in Tintagel Minster, but hardly was she wed when the
news came to him that his old enemy Duke Morgan had fallen on Lyonesse
and was wasting town and field. Then Rivalen manned his ships in
haste, and took Blanchefleur with him to his far land; but she was
with child. He landed below his castle of Kanoël and gave the Queen in
ward to his Marshal Rohalt, and after that set off to wage his war.

Blanchefleur waited for him continually, but he did not come home,
till she learnt upon a day that Duke Morgan had killed him in foul
ambush. She did not weep: she made no cry or lamentation, but her
limbs failed her and grew weak, and her soul was filled with a strong
desire to be rid of the flesh, and though Rohalt tried to soothe her
she would not hear. Three days she awaited re-union with her lord, and
on the fourth she brought forth a son; and taking him in her arms she
said:

“Little son, I have longed a while to see you, and now I see you the
fairest thing ever a woman bore. In sadness came I hither, in sadness
did I bring forth, and in sadness has your first feast day gone. And
as by sadness you came into the world, your name shall be called
Tristan; that is the child of sadness.”

After she had said these words she kissed him, and immediately when
she had kissed him she died.

Rohalt, the keeper of faith, took the child, but already Duke Morgan’s
men besieged the Castle of Kanoël all round about. There is a wise
saying: “Fool-hardy was never hardy,” and he was compelled to yield to
Duke Morgan at his mercy: but for fear that Morgan might slay
Rivalen’s heir the Marshal hid him among his own sons.

When seven years were passed and the time had come to take the child
from the women, Rohalt put Tristan under a good master, the Squire
Gorvenal, and Gorvenal taught him in a few years the arts that go with
barony. He taught him the use of lance and sword and ’scutcheon and
bow, and how to cast stone quoits and to leap wide dykes also: and he
taught him to hate every lie and felony and to keep his given word;
and he taught him the various kinds of song and harp-playing, and the
hunter’s craft; and when the child rode among the young squires you
would have said that he and his horse and his armour were all one
thing. To see him so noble and so proud, broad in the shoulders,
loyal, strong and right, all men glorified Rohalt in such a son. But
Rohalt remembering Rivalen and Blanchefleur (of whose youth and grace
all this was a resurrection) loved him indeed as a son, but in his
heart revered him as his lord.

Now all his joy was snatched from him on a day when certain merchants
of Norway, having lured Tristan to their ship, bore him off as a rich
prize, though Tristan fought hard, as a young wolf struggles, caught
in a gin. But it is a truth well proved, and every sailor knows it,
that the sea will hardly bear a felon ship, and gives no aid to
rapine. The sea rose and cast a dark storm round the ship and drove it
eight days and eight nights at random, till the mariners caught
through the mist a coast of awful cliffs and sea-ward rocks whereon
the sea would have ground their hull to pieces: then they did penance,
knowing that the anger of the sea came of the lad, whom they had
stolen in an evil hour, and they vowed his deliverance and got ready a
boat to put him, if it might be, ashore: then the wind, and sea fell
and the sky shone, and as the Norway ship grew small in the offing, a
quiet tide cast Tristan and the boat upon a beach of sand.

Painfully he climbed the cliff and saw, beyond, a lonely rolling heath
and a forest stretching out and endless. And he wept, remembering
Gorvenal, his father, and the land of Lyonesse. Then the distant cry
of a hunt, with horse and hound, came suddenly and lifted his heart,
and a tall stag broke cover at the forest edge. The pack and the hunt
streamed after it with a tumult of cries and winding horns, but just
as the hounds were racing clustered at the haunch, the quarry turned
to bay at a stones throw from Tristan; a huntsman gave him the thrust,
while all around the hunt had gathered and was winding the kill. But
Tristan, seeing by the gesture of the huntsman that he made to cut the
neck of the stag, cried out:

“My lord, what would you do? Is it fitting to cut up so noble a beast
like any farm-yard hog? Is that the custom of this country?”

And the huntsman answered:

“Fair friend, what startles you? Why yes, first I take off the head of
a stag, and then I cut it into four quarters and we carry it on our
saddle bows to King Mark, our lord: So do we, and so since the days of
the first huntsmen have done the Cornish men. If, however, you know of
some nobler custom, teach it us: take this knife and we will learn it
willingly.”

Then Tristan kneeled and skinned the stag before he cut it up, and
quartered it all in order leaving the crow-bone all whole, as is meet,
and putting aside at the end the head, the haunch, the tongue and the
great heart’s vein; and the huntsmen and the kennel hinds stood over
him with delight, and the Master Huntsman said:

“Friend, these are good ways. In what land learnt you them? Tell us
your country and your name.”

“Good lord, my name is Tristan, and I learnt these ways in my country
of Lyonesse.”

“Tristan,” said the Master Huntsman, “God reward the father that
brought you up so nobly; doubtless he is a baron, rich and strong.”

Now Tristan knew both speech and silence, and he answered:

“No, lord; my father is a burgess. I left his home unbeknownst upon a
ship that trafficked to a far place, for I wished to learn how men
lived in foreign lands. But if you will accept me of the hunt I will
follow you gladly and teach you other crafts of venery.”

“Fair Tristan, I marvel there should be a land where a burgess’s son
can know what a knight’s son knows not elsewhere, but come with us
since you will it; and welcome: we will bring you to King Mark, our
lord.”

Tristan completed his task; to the dogs he gave the heart, the head,
offal and ears; and he taught the hunt how the skinning and the
ordering should be done. Then he thrust the pieces upon pikes and gave
them to this huntsman and to that to carry, to one the snout to
another the haunch to another the flank to another the chine; and he
taught them how to ride by twos in rank, according to the dignity of
the pieces each might bear.

So they took the road and spoke together, till they came on a great
castle and round it fields and orchards, and living waters and fish
ponds and plough lands, and many ships were in its haven, for that
castle stood above the sea. It was well fenced against all assault or
engines of war, and its keep, which the giants had built long ago, was
compact of great stones, like a chess board of vert and azure.

And when Tristan asked its name:

“Good liege,” they said, “we call it Tintagel.”

And Tristan cried:

“Tintagel! Blessed be thou of God, and blessed be they that dwell
within thee.”

(Therein, my lords, therein had Rivalen taken Blanchefleur to wife,
though their son knew it not.)

When they came before the keep the horns brought the barons to the
gates and King Mark himself. And when the Master Huntsman had told him
all the story, and King Mark had marvelled at the good order of the
cavalcade, and the cutting of the stag, and the high art of venery in
all, yet most he wondered at the stranger boy, and still gazed at him,
troubled and wondering whence came his tenderness, and his heart would
answer him nothing; but, my lords, it was blood that spoke, and the
love he had long since borne his sister Blanchefleur.

That evening, when the boards were cleared, a singer out of Wales, a
master, came forward among the barons in Hall and sang a harper’s
song, and as this harper touched the strings of his harp, Tristan who
sat at the King’s feet, spoke thus to him:

“Oh master, that is the first of songs! The Bretons of old wove it
once to chant the loves of Graëlent. And the melody is rare and rare
are the words: master, your voice is subtle: harp us that well.”

But when the Welshman had sung, he answered:

“Boy, what do you know of the craft of music? If the burgesses of
Lyonesse teach their sons harp—play also, and rotes and viols too,
rise, and take this harp and show your skill.”

Then Tristan took the harp and sang so well that the barons softened
as they heard, and King Mark marvelled at the harper from Lyonesse
whither so long ago Rivalen had taken Blanchefleur away.

When the song ended, the King was silent a long space, but he said at
last:

“Son, blessed be the master that taught thee, and blessed be thou of
God: for God loves good singers. Their voices and the voice of the
harp enter the souls of men and wake dear memories and cause them to
forget many a mourning and many a sin. For our joy did you come to
this roof, stay near us a long time, friend.”

And Tristan answered:

“Very willingly will I serve you, sire, as your harper, your huntsman
and your liege.”

So did he, and for three years a mutual love grew up in their hearts.
By day Tristan followed King Mark at pleas and in saddle; by night he
slept in the royal room with the councillors and the peers, and if the
King was sad he would harp to him to soothe his care. The barons also
cherished him, and (as you shall learn) Dinas of Lidan, the seneschal,
beyond all others. And more tenderly than the barons and than Dinas
the King loved him. But Tristan could not forget, or Rohalt his
father, or his master Gorvenal, or the land of Lyonesse.

My lords, a teller that would please, should not stretch his tale too
long, and truly this tale is so various and so high that it needs no
straining. Then let me shortly tell how Rohalt himself, after long
wandering by sea and land, came into Cornwall, and found Tristan, and
showing the King the carbuncle that once was Blanchefleur’s, said:

“King Mark, here is your nephew Tristan, son of your sister
Blanchefleur and of King Rivalen. Duke Morgan holds his land most
wrongfully; it is time such land came back to its lord.”

And Tristan (in a word) when his uncle had armed him knight, crossed
the sea, and was hailed of his father’s vassals, and killed Rivalen’s
slayer and was re-seized of his land.

Then remembering how King Mark could no longer live in joy without
him, he summoned his council and his barons and said this:

“Lords of the Lyonesse, I have retaken this place and I have avenged
King Rivalen by the help of God and of you. But two men Rohalt and
King Mark of Cornwall nourished me, an orphan, and a wandering boy. So
should I call them also fathers. Now a free man has two things
thoroughly his own, his body and his land. To Rohalt then, here, I
will release my land. Do you hold it, father, and your son shall hold
it after you. But my body I give up to King Mark. I will leave this
country, dear though it be, and in Cornwall I will serve King Mark as
my lord. Such is my judgment, but you, my lords of Lyonesse, are my
lieges, and owe me counsel; if then, some one of you will counsel me
another thing let him rise and speak.”

But all the barons praised him, though they wept; and taking with him
Gorvenal only, Tristan set sail for King Mark’s land.

THE MORHOLT OUT OF IRELAND

When Tristan came back to that land, King Mark and all his Barony were
mourning; for the King of Ireland had manned a fleet to ravage
Cornwall, should King Mark refuse, as he had refused these fifteen
years, to pay a tribute his fathers had paid. Now that year this King
had sent to Tintagel, to carry his summons, a giant knight; the
Morholt, whose sister he had wed, and whom no man had yet been able to
overcome: so King Mark had summoned all the barons of his land to
Council, by letters sealed.

On the day assigned, when the barons were gathered in hall, and when
the King had taken his throne, the Morholt said these things:

“King Mark, hear for the last time the summons of the King of Ireland,
my lord. He arraigns you to pay at last that which you have owed so
long, and because you have refused it too long already he bids you
give over to me this day three hundred youths and three hundred
maidens drawn by lot from among the Cornish folk. But if so be that
any would prove by trial of combat that the King of Ireland receives
this tribute without right, I will take up his wager. Which among you,
my Cornish lords, will fight to redeem this land?”

The barons glanced at each other but all were silent.

Then Tristan knelt at the feet of King Mark and said:

“Lord King, by your leave I will do battle.”

And in vain would King Mark have turned him from his purpose,
thinking, how could even valour save so young a knight? But he threw
down his gage to the Morholt, and the Morholt took up the gage.

On the appointed day he had himself clad for a great feat of arms in a
hauberk and in a steel helm, and he entered a boat and drew to the
islet of St. Samson’s, where the knights were to fight each to each
alone. Now the Morholt had hoisted to his mast a sail of rich purple,
and coming fast to land, he moored his boat on the shore. But Tristan
pushed off his own boat adrift with his feet, and said:

“One of us only will go hence alive. One boat will serve.”

And each rousing the other to the fray they passed into the isle.

No man saw the sharp combat; but thrice the salt sea-breeze had wafted
or seemed to waft a cry of fury to the land, when at last towards the
hour of noon the purple sail showed far off; the Irish boat appeared
from the island shore, and there rose a clamour of “the Morholt!” When
suddenly, as the boat grew larger on the sight and topped a wave, they
saw that Tristan stood on the prow holding a sword in his hand. He
leapt ashore, and as the mothers kissed the steel upon his feet he
cried to the Morholt’s men:

“My lords of Ireland, the Morholt fought well. See here, my sword is
broken and a splinter of it stands fast in his head. Take you that
steel, my lords; it is the tribute of Cornwall.”

Then he went up to Tintagel and as he went the people he had freed
waved green boughs, and rich cloths were hung at the windows. But when
Tristan reached the castle with joy, songs and joy-bells sounding
about him, he drooped in the arms of King Mark, for the blood ran from
his wounds.

The Morholt’s men, they landed in Ireland quite cast down. For when
ever he came back into Whitehaven the Morholt had been wont to take
joy in the sight of his clan upon the shore, of the Queen his sister,
and of his niece Iseult the Fair. Tenderly had they cherished him of
old, and had he taken some wound, they healed him, for they were
skilled in balms and potions. But now their magic was vain, for he lay
dead and the splinter of the foreign brand yet stood in his skull till
Iseult plucked it out and shut it in a chest.

From that day Iseult the Fair knew and hated the name of Tristan of
Lyonesse.

But over in Tintagel Tristan languished, for there trickled a
poisonous blood from his wound. The doctors found that the Morholt had
thrust into him a poisoned barb, and as their potions and their
theriac could never heal him they left him in God’s hands. So hateful
a stench came from his wound that all his dearest friends fled him,
all save King Mark, Gorvenal and Dinas of Lidan. They always could
stay near his couch because their love overcame their abhorrence. At
last Tristan had himself carried into a boat apart on the shore; and
lying facing the sea he awaited death, for he thought: “I must die;
but it is good to see the sun and my heart is still high. I would like
to try the sea that brings all chances. … I would have the sea bear me
far off alone, to what land no matter, so that it heal me of my
wound.”

He begged so long that King Mark accepted his desire. He bore him into
a boat with neither sail nor oar, and Tristan wished that his harp
only should be placed beside him: for sails he could not lift, nor oar
ply, nor sword wield; and as a seaman on some long voyage casts to the
sea a beloved companion dead, so Gorvenal pushed out to sea that boat
where his dear son lay; and the sea drew him away.

For seven days and seven nights the sea so drew him; at times to charm
his grief, he harped; and when at last the sea brought him near a
shore where fishermen had left their port that night to fish far out,
they heard as they rowed a sweet and strong and living tune that ran
above the sea, and feathering their oars they listened immovable.

In the first whiteness of the dawn they saw the boat at large: she
went at random and nothing seemed to live in her except the voice of
the harp. But as they neared, the air grew weaker and died; and when
they hailed her Tristan’s hands had fallen lifeless on the strings
though they still trembled. The fishermen took him in and bore him
back to port, to their lady who was merciful and perhaps would heal
him.

It was that same port of Whitehaven where the Morholt lay, and their
lady was Iseult the Fair.

She alone, being skilled in philtres, could save Tristan, but she
alone wished him dead. When Tristan knew himself again (for her art
restored him) he knew himself to be in the land of peril. But he was
yet strong to hold his own and found good crafty words. He told a tale
of how he was a seer that had taken passage on a merchant ship and
sailed to Spain to learn the art of reading all the stars,—of how
pirates had boarded the ship and of how, though wounded, he had fled
into that boat. He was believed, nor did any of the Morholt’s men know
his face again, so hardly had the poison used it. But when, after
forty days, Iseult of the Golden Hair had all but healed him, when
already his limbs had recovered and the grace of youth returned, he
knew that he must escape, and he fled and after many dangers he came
again before Mark the King.

THE QUEST OF THE LADY WITH THE HAIR OF GOLD

My lords, there were in the court of King Mark four barons the basest
of men, who hated Tristan with a hard hate, for his greatness and for
the tender love the King bore him. And well I know their names:
Andret, Guenelon, Gondoïne and Denoalen. They knew that the King had
intent to grow old childless and to leave his land to Tristan; and
their envy swelled and by lies they angered the chief men of Cornwall
against Tristan. They said:

“There have been too many marvels in this man’s life. It was marvel
enough that he beat the Morholt, but by what sorcery did he try the
sea alone at the point of death, or which of us, my lords, could
voyage without mast or sail? They say that warlocks can. It was sure a
warlock feat, and that is a warlock harp of his pours poison daily
into the King’s heart. See how he has bent that heart by power and
chain of sorcery! He will be king yet, my lords, and you will hold
your lands of a wizard.”

They brought over the greater part of the barons and these pressed
King Mark to take to wife some king’s daughter who should give him an
heir, or else they threatened to return each man into his keep and
wage him war. But the King turned against them and swore in his heart
that so long as his dear nephew lived no king’s daughter should come
to his bed. Then in his turn did Tristan (in his shame to be thought
to serve for hire) threaten that if the King did not yield to his
barons, he would himself go over sea serve some great king. At this,
King Mark made a term with his barons and gave them forty days to hear
his decision.

On the appointed day he waited alone in his chamber and sadly mused:
“Where shall I find a king’s daughter so fair and yet so distant that
I may feign to wish her my wife?”

Just then by his window that looked upon the sea two building swallows
came in quarrelling together. Then, startled, they flew out, but had
let fall from their beaks a woman’s hair, long and fine, and shining
like a beam of light.

King Mark took it, and called his barons and Tristan and said:

“To please you, lords, I will take a wife; but you must seek her whom
I have chosen.”

“Fair lord, we wish it all,” they said, “and who may she be?”

“Why,” said he, “she whose hair this is; nor will I take another.”

“And whence, lord King, comes this Hair of Gold; who brought it and
from what land?”

“It comes, my lords, from the Lady with the Hair of Gold, the swallows
brought it me. They know from what country it came.”

Then the barons saw themselves mocked and cheated, and they turned
with sneers to Tristan, for they thought him to have counselled the
trick. But Tristan, when he had looked on the Hair of Gold, remembered
Iseult the Fair and smiled and said this:

“King Mark, can you not see that the doubts of these lords shame me?
You have designed in vain. I will go seek the Lady with the Hair of
Gold. The search is perilous: never the less, my uncle, I would once
more put my body and my life into peril for you; and that your barons
may know I love you loyally, I take this oath, to die on the adventure
or to bring back to this castle of Tintagel the Queen with that fair
hair.”

He fitted out a great ship and loaded it with corn and wine, with
honey and all manner of good things; he manned it with Gorvenal and a
hundred young knights of high birth, chosen among the bravest, and he
clothed them in coats of home-spun and in hair cloth so that they
seemed merchants only: but under the deck he hid rich cloth of gold
and scarlet as for a great king’s messengers.

When the ship had taken the sea the helmsman asked him:

“Lord, to what land shall I steer?”

“Sir,” said he, “steer for Ireland, straight for Whitehaven harbour.”

At first Tristan made believe to the men of Whitehaven that his
friends were merchants of England come peacefully to barter; but as
these strange merchants passed the day in the useless games of
draughts and chess, and seemed to know dice better than the bargain
price of corn, Tristan feared discovery and knew not how to pursue his
quest.

Now it chanced once upon the break of day that he heard a cry so
terrible that one would have called it a demon’s cry; nor had he ever
heard a brute bellow in such wise, so awful and strange it seemed. He
called a woman who passed by the harbour, and said:

“Tell me, lady, whence comes that voice I have heard, and hide me
nothing.”

“My lord,” said she, “I will tell you truly. It is the roar of a
dragon the most terrible and dauntless upon earth. Daily it leaves its
den and stands at one of the gates of the city: Nor can any come out
or go in till a maiden has been given up to it; and when it has her in
its claws it devours her.”

“Lady,” said Tristan, “make no mock of me, but tell me straight: Can a
man born of woman kill this thing?”

“Fair sir, and gentle,” she said, “I cannot say; but this is sure:
Twenty knights and tried have run the venture, because the King of
Ireland has published it that he will give his daughter, Iseult the
Fair, to whomsoever shall kill the beast; but it has devoured them
all.”

Tristan left the woman and returning to his ship armed himself in
secret, and it was a fine sight to see so noble a charger and so good
a knight come out from such a merchant-hull: but the haven was empty
of folk, for the dawn had barely broken and none saw him as he rode to
the gate. And hardly had he passed it, when he met suddenly five men
at full gallop flying towards the town. Tristan seized one by his
hair, as he passed, and dragged him over his mount’s crupper and held
him fast:

“God save you, my lord,” said he, “and whence does the dragon come?”
And when the other had shown him by what road, he let him go.

As the monster neared, he showed the head of a bear and red eyes like
coals of fire and hairy tufted ears; lion’s claws, a serpent’s tail,
and a griffin’s body.

Tristan charged his horse at him so strongly that, though the beast’s
mane stood with fright yet he drove at the dragon: his lance struck
its scales and shivered. Then Tristan drew his sword and struck at the
dragon’s head, but he did not so much as cut the hide. The beast felt
the blow: with its claws he dragged at the shield and broke it from
the arm; then, his breast unshielded, Tristan used the sword again and
struck so strongly that the air rang all round about: but in vain, for
he could not wound and meanwhile the dragon vomited from his nostrils
two streams of loath-some flames, and Tristan’s helm blackened like a
cinder and his horse stumbled and fell down and died; but Tristan
standing on his feet thrust his sword right into the beast’s jaws, and
split its heart in two.

Then he cut out the tongue and put it into his hose, but as the poison
came against his flesh the hero fainted and fell in the high grass
that bordered the marsh around.

Now the man he had stopped in flight was the Seneschal of Ireland and
he desired Iseult the Fair: and though he was a coward, he had dared
so far as to return with his companions secretly, and he found the
dragon dead; so he cut off its head and bore it to the King, and
claimed the great reward.

The King could credit his prowess but hardly, yet wished justice done
and summoned his vassals to court, so that there, before the Barony
assembled, the seneschal should furnish proof of his victory won.

When Iseult the Fair heard that she was to be given to this coward
first she laughed long, and then she wailed. But on the morrow,
doubting some trick, she took with her Perinis her squire and Brangien
her maid, and all three rode unbeknownst towards the dragon’s lair:
and Iseult saw such a trail on the road as made her wonder—for the
hoofs that made it had never been shod in her land. Then she came on
the dragon, headless, and a dead horse beside him: nor was the horse
harnessed in the fashion of Ireland. Some foreign man had slain the
beast, but they knew not whether he still lived or no.

They sought him long, Iseult and Perinis and Brangien together, till
at last Brangien saw the helm glittering in the marshy grass: and
Tristan still breathed. Perinis put him on his horse and bore him
secretly to the women’s rooms. There Iseult told her mother the tale
and left the hero with her, and as the Queen unharnessed him, the
dragon’s tongue fell from his boot of steel. Then, the Queen of
Ireland revived him by the virtue of an herb and said:

“Stranger, I know you for the true slayer of the dragon: but our
seneschal, a felon, cut off its head and claims my daughter Iseult for
his wage; will you be ready two days hence to give him the lie in
battle?”

“Queen,” said he, “the time is short, but you, I think, can cure me in
two days. Upon the dragon I conquered Iseult, and on the seneschal
perhaps I shall reconquer her.”

Then the Queen brewed him strong brews, and on the morrow Iseult the
Fair got him ready a bath and anointed him with a balm her mother had
conjured, and as he looked at her he thought, “So I have found the
Queen of the Hair of Gold,” and he smiled as he thought it. But
Iseult, noting it, thought, “Why does he smile, or what have I
neglected of the things due to a guest? He smiles to think I have for—
gotten to burnish his armour.”

She went and drew the sword from its rich sheath, but when she saw the
splinter gone and the gap in the edge she thought of the Morholt’s
head. She balanced a moment in doubt, then she went to where she kept
the steel she had found in the skull and she put it to the sword, and
it fitted so that the join was hardly seen.

She ran to where Tristan lay wounded, and with the sword above him she
cried:

“You are that Tristan of the Lyonesse, who killed the Morholt, my
mother’s brother, and now you shall die in your turn.”

Tristan strained to ward the blow, but he was too weak; his wit,
however, stood firm in spite of evil and he said:

“So be it, let me die: but to save yourself long memories, listen
awhile. King’s daughter, my life is not only in your power but is
yours of right. My life is yours because you have twice returned it
me. Once, long ago: for I was the wounded harper whom you healed of
the poison of the Morholt’s shaft. Nor repent the healing: were not
these wounds had in fair fight? Did I kill the Morholt by treason? Had
he not defied me and was I not held to the defence of my body? And now
this second time also you have saved me. It was for you I fought the
beast.

“But let us leave these things. I would but show you how my life is
your own. Then if you kill me of right for the glory of it, you may
ponder for long years, praising yourself that you killed a wounded
guest who had wagered his life in your gaining.”

Iseult replied: “I hear strange words. Why should he that killed the
Morholt seek me also, his niece? Doubtless because the Morholt came
for a tribute of maidens from Cornwall, so you came to boast returning
that you had brought back the maiden who was nearest to him, to
Cornwall, a slave.”

“King’s daughter,” said Tristan, “No. … One day two swallows flew, and
flew to Tintagel and bore one hair out of all your hairs of gold, and
I thought they brought me good will and peace, so I came to find you
over-seas. See here, amid the threads of gold upon my coat your hair
is sown: the threads are tarnished, but your bright hair still
shines.”

Iseult put down the sword and taking up the Coat of Arms she saw upon
it the Hair of Gold and was silent a long space, till she kissed him
on the lips to prove peace, and she put rich garments over him.

On the day of the barons’ assembly, Tristan sent Perinis privily to
his ship to summon his companions that they should come to court
adorned as befitted the envoys of a great king.

One by one the hundred knights passed into the hall where all the
barons of Ireland stood, they entered in silence and sat all in rank
together: on their scarlet and purple the gems gleamed.

When the King had taken his throne, the seneschal arose to prove by
witness and by arms that he had slain the dragon and that so Iseult
was won. Then Iseult bowed to her father and said:

“King, I have here a man who challenges your seneschal for lies and
felony. Promise that you will pardon this man all his past deeds, who
stands to prove that he and none other slew the dragon, and grant him
forgiveness and your peace.”

The King said, “I grant it.” But Iseult said, “Father, first give me
the kiss of peace and forgiveness, as a sign that you will give him
the same.”

Then she found Tristan and led him before the Barony. And as he came
the hundred knights rose all together, and crossed their arms upon
their breasts and bowed, so the Irish knew that he was their lord.

But among the Irish many knew him again and cried, “Tristan of
Lyonesse that slew the Morholt!” They drew their swords and clamoured
for death. But Iseult cried: “King, kiss this man upon the lips as
your oath was,” and the King kissed him, and the clamour fell.

Then Tristan showed the dragon’s tongue and offered the seneschal
battle, but the seneschal looked at his face and dared not.

Then Tristan said:

“My lords, you have said it, and it is truth: I killed the Morholt.
But I crossed the sea to offer you a good blood-fine, to ransom that
deed and get me quit of it.

“I put my body in peril of death and rid you of the beast and have so
conquered Iseult the Fair, and having conquered her I will bear her
away on my ship.

“But that these lands of Cornwall and Ireland may know no more hatred,
but love only, learn that King Mark, my lord, will marry her. Here
stand a hundred knights of high name, who all will swear with an oath
upon the relics of the holy saints, that King Mark sends you by their
embassy offer of peace and of brotherhood and goodwill; and that he
would by your courtesy hold Iseult as his honoured wife, and that he
would have all the men of Cornwall serve her as their Queen.”

When the lords of Ireland heard this they acclaimed it, and the King
also was content.

Then, since that treaty and alliance was to be made, the King her
father took Iseult by the hand and asked of Tristan that he should
take an oath; to wit that he would lead her loyally to his lord, and
Tristan took that oath and swore it before the knights and the Barony
of Ireland assembled. Then the King put Iseult’s right hand into
Tristan’s right hand, and Tristan held it for a space in token of
seizin for the King of Cornwall.

So, for the love of King Mark, did Tristan conquer the Queen of the
Hair of Gold.

THE PHILTRE

When the day of Iseult’s livery to the Lords of Cornwall drew near,
her mother gathered herbs and flowers and roots and steeped them in
wine, and brewed a potion of might, and having done so, said apart to
Brangien:

“Child, it is yours to go with Iseult to King Mark’s country, for you
love her with a faithful love. Take then this pitcher and remember
well my words. Hide it so that no eye shall see nor no lip go near it:
but when the wedding night has come and that moment in which the
wedded are left alone, pour this essenced wine into a cup and offer it
to King Mark and to Iseult his queen. Oh! Take all care, my child,
that they alone shall taste this brew. For this is its power: they who
drink of it together love each other with their every single sense and
with their every thought, forever, in life and in death.”

And Brangien promised the Queen that she would do her bidding.

On the bark that bore her to Tintagel Iseult the Fair was weeping as
she remembered her own land, and mourning swelled her heart, and she
said, “Who am I that I should leave you to follow unknown men, my
mother and my land? Accursed be the sea that bears me, for rather
would I lie dead on the earth where I was born than live out there,
beyond. …

One day when the wind had fallen and the sails hung slack Tristan
dropped anchor by an Island and the hundred knights of Cornwall and
the sailors, weary of the sea, landed all. Iseult alone remained
aboard and a little serving maid, when Tristan came near the Queen to
calm her sorrow. The sun was hot above them and they were athirst and,
as they called, the little maid looked about for drink for them and
found that pitcher which the mother of Iseult had given into
Brangien’s keeping. And when she came on it, the child cried, “I have
found you wine!” Now she had found not wine — but Passion and Joy most
sharp, and Anguish without end, and Death.

The Queen drank deep of that draught and gave it to Tristan and he
drank also long and emptied it all.

Brangien came in upon them; she saw them gazing at each other in
silence as though ravished and apart; she saw before them the pitcher
standing there; she snatched it up and cast it into the shuddering sea
and cried aloud: “Cursed be the day I was born and cursed the day that
first I trod this deck. Iseult, my friend, and Tristan, you, you have
drunk death together.”

And once more the bark ran free for Tintagel. But it seemed to Tristan
as though an ardent briar, sharp-thorned but with flower most sweet
smelling, drave roots into his blood and laced the lovely body of
Iseult all round about it and bound it to his own and to his every
thought and desire. And he thought, “Felons, that charged me with
coveting King Mark’s land, I have come lower by far, for it is not his
land I covet. Fair uncle, who loved me orphaned ere ever you knew in
me the blood of your sister Blanchefleur, you that wept as you bore me
to that boat alone, why did you not drive out the boy that was to
betray you? Ah! What thought was that! Iseult is yours and I am but
your vassal; Iseult is yours and I am your son; Iseult is yours and
may not love me.”

But Iseult loved him, though she would have hated. She could not hate,
for a tenderness more sharp than hatred tore her.

And Brangien watched them in anguish, suffering more cruelly because
she alone knew the depth of evil done.

Two days she watched them, seeing them refuse all food or comfort and
seeking each other as blind men seek, wretched apart and together more
wretched still, for then they trembled each for the first avowal.

On the third day, as Tristan neared the tent on deck where Iseult sat,
she saw him coming and she said to him, very humbly, “Come in, my
lord.”

“Queen,” said Tristan, “why do you call me lord? Am I not your liege
and vassal, to revere and serve and cherish you as my lady and Queen?”

But Iseult answered, “No, you know that you are my lord and my master,
and I your slave. Ah, why did I not sharpen those wounds of the
wounded singer, or let die that dragon-slayer in the grasses of the
marsh? But then I did not know what now I know!”

“And what is it that you know, Iseult?”

She laid her arm upon Tristan’s shoulder, the light of her eyes was
drowned and her lips trembled.

“The love of you,” she said. Whereat he put his lips to hers.

But as they thus tasted their first joy, Brangien, that watched them,
stretched her arms and cried at their feet in tears:

“Stay and return if still you can … But oh! that path has no
returning. For already Love and his strength drag you on and now
henceforth forever never shall you know joy without pain again. The
wine possesses you, the draught your mother gave me, the draught the
King alone should have drunk with you: but that old Enemy has tricked
us, all us three; friend Tristan, Iseult my friend, for that bad ward
I kept take here my body and my life, for through me and in that cup
you have drunk not love alone, but love and death together.”

The lovers held each other; life and desire trembled through their
youth, and Tristan said, “Well then, come Death.”

And as evening fell, upon the bark that heeled and ran to King Mark’s
land, they gave themselves up utterly to love.

THE TALL PINE-TREE

As King Mark came down to greet Iseult upon the shore, Tristan took
her hand and led her to the King and the King took seizin of her,
taking her hand. He led her in great pomp to his castle of Tintagel,
and as she came in hall amid the vassals her beauty shone so that the
walls were lit as they are lit at dawn. Then King Mark blessed those
swallows which, by happy courtesy, had brought the Hair of Gold, and
Tristan also he blessed, and the hundred knights who, on that
adventurous bark, had gone to find him joy of heart and of eyes; yet
to him also that ship was to bring sting, torment and mourning.

And on the eighteenth day, having called his Barony together he took
Iseult to wife. But on the wedding night, to save her friend, Brangien
took her place in the darkness, for her remorse demanded even this
from her; nor was the trick discovered.

Then Iseult lived as a queen, but lived in sadness. She had King
Mark’s tenderness and the barons’ honour; the people also loved her;
she passed her days amid the frescoes on the walls and floors all
strewn with flowers; good jewels had she and purple cloth and tapestry
of Hungary and Thessaly too, and songs of harpers, and curtains upon
which were worked leopards and eagles and popinjays and all the beasts
of sea and field. And her love too she had, love high and splendid,
for as is the custom among great lords, Tristan could ever be near
her. At his leisure and his dalliance, night and day: for he slept in
the King’s chamber as great lords do, among the lieges and the
councillors. Yet still she feared; for though her love were secret and
Tristan unsuspected (for who suspects a son?) Brangien knew. And
Brangien seemed in the Queen’s mind like a witness spying; for
Brangien alone knew what manner of life she led, and held her at mercy
so. And the Queen thought Ah, if some day she should weary of serving
as a slave the bed where once she passed for Queen … If Tristan should
die from her betrayal! So fear maddened the Queen, but not in truth
the fear of Brangien who was loyal; her own heart bred the fear.

Not Brangien who was faithful, not Brangien, but themselves had these
lovers to fear, for hearts so stricken will lose their vigilance. Love
pressed them hard, as thirst presses the dying stag to the stream;
love dropped upon them from high heaven, as a hawk slipped after long
hunger falls right upon the bird. And love will not be hidden.
Brangien indeed by her prudence saved them well, nor ever were the
Queen and her lover unguarded. But in every hour and place every man
could see Love terrible, that rode them, and could see in these lovers
their every sense overflowing like new wine working in the vat.

The four felons at court who had hated Tristan of old for his prowess,
watched the Queen; they had guessed that great love, and they burnt
with envy and hatred and now a kind of evil joy. They planned to give
news of their watching to the King, to see his tenderness turned to
fury, Tristan thrust out or slain, and the Queen in torment; for
though they feared Tristan their hatred mastered their fear; and, on a
day, the four barons called King Mark to parley, and Andret said:

“Fair King, your heart will be troubled and we four also mourn; yet
are we bound to tell you what we know. You have placed your trust in
Tristan and Tristan would shame you. In vain we warned you. For the
love of one man you have mocked ties of blood and all your Barony.
Learn then that Tristan loves the Queen; it is truth proved and many a
word is passing on it now.”

The royal King shrank and answered:

“Coward! What thought was that? Indeed I have placed my trust in
Tristan. And rightly, for on the day when the Morholt offered combat
to you all, you hung your heads and were dumb, and you trembled before
him; but Tristan dared him for the honour of this land, and took
mortal wounds. Therefore do you hate him, and therefore do I cherish
him beyond thee, Andret, and beyond any other; but what then have you
seen or heard or known?”

“Naught, lord, save what your eyes could see or your ears hear. Look
you and listen, Sire, if there is yet time.”

And they left him to taste the poison.

Then King Mark watched the Queen and Tristan; but Brangien noting it
warned them both and the King watched in vain, so that, soon wearying
of an ignoble task, but knowing (alas!) that he could not kill his
uneasy thought, he sent for Tristan and said:

“Tristan, leave this castle; and having left it, remain apart and do
not think to return to it, and do not repass its moat or boundaries.
Felons have charged you with an awful treason, but ask me nothing; I
could not speak their words without shame to us both, and for your
part seek you no word to appease. I have not believed them … had I
done so … But their evil words have troubled all my soul and only by
your absence can my disquiet be soothed. Go, doubtless I will soon
recall you. Go, my son, you are still dear to me.

When the felons heard the news they said among themselves, “He is
gone, the wizard; he is driven out. Surely he will cross the sea on
far adventures to carry his traitor service to some distant King.”

But Tristan had not strength to depart altogether; and when he had
crossed the moats and boundaries of the Castle he knew he could go no
further. He stayed in Tintagel town and lodged with Gorvenal in a
burgess’ house, and languished oh! more wounded than when in that past
day the shaft of the Morholt had tainted his body.

In the close towers Iseult the Fair drooped also, but more wretched
still. For it was hers all day long to feign laughter and all night
long to conquer fever and despair. And all night as she lay by King
Mark’s side, fever still kept her waking, and she stared at darkness.
She longed to fly to Tristan and she dreamt dreams of running to the
gates and of finding there sharp scythes, traps of the felons, that
cut her tender knees; and she dreamt of weakness and falling, and that
her wounds had left her blood upon the ground. Now these lovers would
have died, but Brangien succoured them. At peril of her life she found
the house where Tristan lay. There Gorvenal opened to her very gladly,
knowing what salvation she could bring.

So she found Tristan, and to save the lovers she taught him a device,
nor was ever known a more subtle ruse of love.

Behind the castle of Tintagel was an orchard fenced around and wide
and all closed in with stout and pointed stakes and numberless trees
were there and fruit on them, birds and clusters of sweet grapes. And
furthest from the castle, by the stakes of the pallisade, was a tall
pine-tree, straight and with heavy branches spreading from its trunk.
At its root a living spring welled calm into a marble round, then ran
between two borders winding, throughout the orchard and so, on, till
it flowed at last within the castle and through the women’s rooms.

And every evening, by Brangien’s counsel, Tristan cut him twigs and
bark, leapt the sharp stakes and, having come beneath the pine, threw
them into the clear spring; they floated light as foam down the stream
to the women’s rooms; and Iseult watched for their coming, and on
those evenings she would wander out into the orchard and find her
friend. Lithe and in fear would she come, watching at every step for
what might lurk in the trees observing, foes or the felons whom she
knew, till she spied Tristan; and the night and the branches of the
pine protected them.

And so she said one night: “Oh, Tristan, I have heard that the castle
is faëry and that twice a year it vanishes away. So is it vanished now
and this is that enchanted orchard of which the harpers sing.” And as
she said it, the sentinels bugled dawn.

Iseult had refound her joy. Mark’s thought of ill-ease grew faint; but
the felons felt or knew which way lay truth, and they guessed that
Tristan had met the Queen. Till at last Duke Andret (whom God shame)
said to his peers:

“My lords, let us take counsel of Frocin the Dwarf; for he knows the
seven arts, and magic and every kind of charm. He will teach us if he
will the wiles of Iseult the Fair.”

The little evil man drew signs for them and characters of sorcery; he
cast the fortunes of the hour and then at last he said:

“Sirs, high good lords, this night shall you seize them both.”

Then they led the little wizard to the King, and he said:

“Sire, bid your huntsmen leash the hounds and saddle the horses,
proclaim a seven days’ hunt in the forest and seven nights abroad
therein, and hang me high if you do not hear this night what converse
Tristan holds.”

So did the King unwillingly; and at fall of night he left the hunt
taking the dwarf in pillion, and entered the orchard, and the dwarf
took him to the tall pine-tree, saying:

“Fair King, climb into these branches and take with you your arrows
and your bow, for you may need them; and bide you still.”

That night the moon shone clear. Hid in the branches the King saw his
nephew leap the pallisades and throw his bark and twigs into the
stream. But Tristan had bent over the round well to throw them and so
doing had seen the image of the King. He could not stop the branches
as they floated away, and there, yonder, in the women’s rooms, Iseult
was watching and would come.

She came, and Tristan watched her motionless. Above him in the tree he
heard the click of the arrow when it fits the string.

She came, but with more prudence than her wont, thinking, “What has
passed, that Tristan does not come to meet me? He has seen some foe.”

Suddenly, by the clear moonshine, she also saw the King’s shadow in
the fount. She showed the wit of women well, she did not lift her
eyes.

“Lord God,” she said, low down, grant I may be the first to speak.”

“Tristan,” she said, “what have you dared to do, calling me hither at
such an hour? Often have you called me —to beseech, you said. And
Queen though I am, I know you won me that title—and I have come. What
would you?”

“Queen, I would have you pray the King for me.”

She was in tears and trembling, but Tristan praised God the Lord who
had shown his friend her peril.

“Queen,” he went on, “often and in vain have I summoned you; never
would you come. Take pity; the King hates me and I know not why.
Perhaps you know the cause and can charm his anger. For whom can he
trust if not you, chaste Queen and courteous, Iseult?”

“Truly, Lord Tristan, you do not know he doubts us both. And I, to add
to my shame, must acquaint you of it. Ah! but God knows if I lie,
never went cut my love to any man but he that first received me. And
would you have me, at such a time, implore your pardon of the King?
Why, did he know of my passage here to-night he would cast my ashes to
the wind. My body trembles and I am afraid. I go, for I have waited
too long.”

In the branches the King smiled and had pity.

And as Iseult fled: “Queen,” said Tristan, “in the Lord’s name help
me, for charity.”

“Friend,” she replied, “God aid you! The King wrongs you but the Lord
God will be by you in whatever land you go.”

So she went back to the women’s rooms and told it to Brangien, who
cried: “Iseult, God has worked a miracle for you, for He is
compassionate and will not hurt the innocent in heart.”

And when he had left the orchard, the King said smiling:

“Fair nephew, that ride you planned is over now.”

But in an open glade apart, Frocin, the Dwarf, read in the clear stars
that the King now meant his death; he blackened with shame and fear
and fled into Wales.

THE DISCOVERY

King Mark made peace with Tristan. Tristan returned to the castle as
of old. Tristan slept in the King’s chamber with his peers. He could
come or go, the King thought no more of it.

Mark had pardoned the felons, and as the seneschal, Dinas of Lidan,
found the dwarf wandering in a forest abandoned, he brought him home,
and the King had pity and pardoned even him.

But his goodness did but feed the ire of the barons, who swore this
oath: If the King kept Tristan in the land they would withdraw to
their strongholds as for war, and they called the King to parley.

“Lord,” said they, “Drive you Tristan forth. He loves the Queen as all
who choose can see, but as for us we will bear it no longer.”

And the King sighed, looking down in silence.

“ King,” they went on, “we will not bear it, for we know now that this
is known to you and that yet you will not move. Parley you, and take
counsel. As for us if you will not exile this man, your nephew, and
drive him forth out of your land forever, we will withdraw within our
Bailiwicks and take our neighbours also from your court: for we cannot
endure his presence longer in this place. Such is your balance:
choose.”

“My lords,” said he, “once I hearkened to the evil words you spoke of
Tristan, yet was I wrong in the end. But you are my lieges and I would
not lose the service of my men. Counsel me therefore, I charge you,
you that owe me counsel. You know me for a man neither proud nor
overstepping.”

“Lord,” said they, “call then Frocin hither. You mistrust him for that
orchard night. Still, was it not he that read in the stars of the
Queen’s coming there and to the very pine-tree too? He is very wise,
take counsel of him.”

And he came, did that hunchback of Hell: the felons greeted him and he
planned this evil.

“Sire,” said he, “let your nephew ride hard to-morrow at dawn with a
brief drawn up on parchment and well sealed with a seal: bid him ride
to King Arthur at Carduel. Sire, he sleeps with the peers in your
chamber; go you out when the first sleep falls on men, and if he love
Iseult so madly, why, then I swear by God and by the laws of Rome, he
will try to speak with her before he rides. But if he do so unknown to
you or to me, then slay me. As for the trap, let me lay it, but do you
say nothing of his ride to him until the time for sleep.”

And when King Mark had agreed, this dwarf did a vile thing. He bought
of a baker four farthings’ worth of flour, and hid it in the turn of
his coat. That night, when the King had supped and the men-at-arms lay
down to sleep in hall, Tristan came to the King as custom was, and the
King said:

“Fair nephew, do my will: ride to-morrow night to King Arthur at
Carduel, and give him this brief, with my greeting, that he may open
it: and stay you with him but one day.”

And when Tristan said: “I will take it on the morrow;”

The King added: “Aye, and before day dawn.”

But, as the peers slept all round the King their lord, that night, a
mad thought took Tristan that, before he rode, he knew not for how
long, before dawn he would say a last word to the Queen. And there was
a spear length in the darkness between them. Now the dwarf slept with
the rest in the King’s chamber, and when he thought that all slept he
rose and scattered the flour silently in the spear length that lay
between Tristan and the Queen; but Tristan watched and saw him, and
said to himself:

“It is to mark my footsteps, but there shall be no marks to show.”

At midnight, when all was dark in the room, no candle nor any lamp
glimmering, the King went out silently by the door and with him the
dwarf. Then Tristan rose in the darkness and judged the spear length
and leapt the space between, for his farewell. But that day in the
hunt a boar had wounded him in the leg, and in this effort the wound
bled. He did not feel it or see it in the darkness, but the blood
dripped upon the couches and the flour strewn between; and outside in
the moonlight the dwarf read the heavens and knew what had been done
and he cried:

“Enter, my King, and if you do not hold them, hang me high.”

Then the King and the dwarf and the four felons ran in with lights and
noise, and though Tristan had regained his place there was the blood
for witness, and though Iseult feigned sleep, and Perinis too, who lay
at Tristan’s feet, yet there was the blood for witness. And the King
looked in silence at the blood where it lay upon the bed and the
boards and trampled into the flour.

And the four barons held Tristan down upon his bed and mocked the
Queen also, promising her full justice; and they bared and showed the
wound whence the blood flowed.

Then the King said:

“Tristan, now nothing longer holds. To-morrow you shall die.”

And Tristan answered:

“Have mercy, Lord, in the name of God that suffered the Cross!”

But the felons called on the King to take vengeance, saying:

“Do justice, King: take vengeance.”

And Tristan went on, “Have mercy, not on me—for why should I stand at
dying?—Truly, but for you, I would have sold my honour high to cowards
who, under your peace, have put hands on my body—but in homage to you
I have yielded and you may do with me what you will. But, lord,
remember the Queen!”

And as he knelt at the King’s feet he still complained:

“Remember the Queen; for if any man of your household make so bold as
to maintain the lie that I loved her unlawfully I will stand up armed
to him in a ring. Sire, in the name of God the Lord, have mercy on
her.”

Then the barons bound him with ropes, and the Queen also. But had
Tristan known that trial by combat was to be denied him, certainly he
would not have suffered it.

For he trusted in God and knew no man dared draw sword against him in
the lists. And truly he did well to trust in God, for though the
felons mocked him when he said he had loved loyally, yet I call you to
witness, my lords who read this, and who know of the philtre drunk
upon the high seas, and who, understand whether his love were
disloyalty indeed. For men see this and that outward thing, but God
alone the heart, and in the heart alone is crime and the sole final
judge is God. Therefore did He lay down the law that a man accused
might uphold his cause by battle, and God himself fights for the
innocent in such a combat.

Therefore did Tristan claim justice and the right of battle and
therefore was he careful to fail in nothing of the homage he owed King
Mark, his lord.

But had he known what was coming, he would have killed the felons.

THE CHANTRY LEAP

Dark was the night, and the news ran that Tristan and the Queen were
held and that the King would kill them; and wealthy burgess, or common
man, they wept and ran to the palace.

And the murmurs and the cries ran through the city, but such was the
King’s anger in his castle above that not the strongest nor the
proudest baron dared move him.

Night ended and the day drew near. Mark, before dawn, rode out to the
place where he held pleas and judgment. He ordered a ditch to be dug
in the earth and knotty vine-shoots and thorns to be laid therein.

At the hour of Prime he had a ban cried through his land to gather the
men of Cornwall; they came with a great noise and the King spoke them
thus:

“My lords, I have made here a faggot of thorns for Tristan and the
Queen; for they have fallen.”

But they cried all, with tears:

“A sentence, lord, a sentence; an indictment and pleas; for killing
without trial is shame and crime.”

But Mark answered in his anger:

“Neither respite, nor delay, nor pleas, nor sentence. By God that made
the world, if any dare petition me, he shall burn first!”

He ordered the fire to be lit, and Tristan to be called.

The flames rose, and all were silent before the flames, and the King
waited.

The servants ran to the room where watch was kept on the two lovers;
and they dragged Tristan out by his hands though he wept for his
honour; but as they dragged him off in such a shame, the Queen still
called to him:

“Friend, if I die that you may live, that will be great joy.”

Now, hear how full of pity is God and how He heard the lament and the
prayers of the common folk, that day.

For as Tristan and his guards went down from the town to where the
faggot burned, near the road upon a rock was a chantry, it stood at a
cliff’s edge steep and sheer, and it turned to the sea-breeze; in the
apse of it were windows glazed. Then Tristan said to those with him:

“My lords, let me enter this chantry, to pray for a moment the mercy
of God whom I have offended; my death is near. There is but one door
to the place, my lords, and each of you has his sword drawn. So, you
may well see that, when my prayer to God is done, I must come past you
again: when I have prayed God, my lords, for the last time.

And one of the guards said: “Why, let him go in.”

So they let him enter to pray. But he, once in, dashed through and
leapt the altar rail and the altar too and forced a window of the
apse, and leapt again over the cliff’s edge. So might he die, but not
of that shameful death before the people.

Now learn, my lords, how generous was God to him that day. The wind
took Tristan’s cloak and he fell upon a smooth rock at the cliff’s
foot, which to this day the men of Cornwall call “Tristan’s leap.”

His guards still waited for him at the chantry door, but vainly, for
God was now his guard. And he ran, and the fine sand crunched under
his feet, and far off he saw the faggot burning, and the smoke and the
crackling flames; and fled.

Sword girt and bridle loose, Gorvenal had fled the city, lest the King
burn him in his master’s place: and he found Tristan on the shore.

“Master,” said Tristan, “God has saved me, but oh! master, to what
end? For without Iseult I may not and I will not live, and I rather
had died of my fall. They will burn her for me, then I too will die
for her.”

“Lord,” said Gorvenal, “take no counsel of anger. See here this
thicket with a ditch dug round about it. Let us hide therein where the
track passes near, and comers by it will tell us news; and, boy, if
they burn Iseult, I swear by God, the Son of Mary, never to sleep
under a roof again until she be avenged.”

There was a poor man of the common folk that had seen Tristan’s fall,
and had seen him stumble and rise after, and he crept to Tintagel and
to Iseult where she was bound, and said:

“Queen, weep no more. Your friend has fled safely.”

“Then I thank God,” said she, “and whether they bind or loose me, and
whether they kill or spare me, I care but little now.”

And though blood came at the cord-knots, so tightly had the traitors
bound her, yet still she said, smiling:

“Did I weep for that when God has loosed my friend I should be little
worth.”

When the news came to the King that Tristan had leapt that leap and
was lost he paled with anger, and bade his men bring forth Iseult.

They dragged her from the room, and she came before the crowd, held by
her delicate hands, from which blood dropped, and the crowd called:

“Have pity on her—the loyal Queen and honoured! Surely they that gave
her up brought mourning on us all—our curses on them!”

But the King’s men dragged her to the thorn faggot as it blazed. She
stood up before the flame, and the crowd cried its anger, and cursed
the traitors and the King. None could see her without pity, unless he
had a felon’s heart: she was so tightly bound. The tears ran down her
face and fell upon her grey gown where ran a little thread of gold,
and a thread of gold was twined into her hair.

Just then there had come up a hundred lepers of the King’s, deformed
and broken, white horribly, and limping on their crutches. And they
drew near the flame, and being evil, loved the sight. And their chief
Ivan, the ugliest of them all, cried to the King in a quavering voice:

“O King, you would burn this woman in that flame, and it is sound
justice, but too swift, for very soon the fire will fall, and her
ashes will very soon be scattered by the high wind and her agony be
done. Throw her rather to your lepers where she may drag out a life
for ever asking death.”

And the King answered:

“Yes; let her live that life, for it is better justice and more
terrible. I can love those that gave me such a thought.”

And the lepers answered:

“Throw her among us, and make her one of us. Never shall lady have
known a worse end. And look,” they said, “at our rags and our
abominations. She has had pleasure in rich stuffs and furs, jewels and
walls of marble, honour, good wines and joy, but when she sees your
lepers always, King, and only them for ever, their couches and their
huts, then indeed she will know the wrong she has done, and bitterly
desire even that great flame of thorns.”

And as the King heard them, he stood a long time without moving; then
he ran to the Queen and seized her by the hand, and she cried:

“Burn me! rather burn me!”

But the King gave her up, and Ivan took her, and the hundred lepers
pressed around, and to hear her cries all the crowd rose in pity. But
Ivan had an evil gladness, and as he went he dragged her out of the
borough bounds, with his hideous company.

Now they took that road where Tristan lay in hiding, and Gorvenal said
to him:

“Son, here is your friend. Will you do naught?”

Then Tristan mounted the horse and spurred it out of the bush, and
cried:

“Ivan, you have been at the Queen’s side a moment, and too long. Now
leave her if you would live.”

But Ivan threw his cloak away and shouted:

“Your clubs, comrades, and your staves! Crutches in the air—for a
fight is on!”

Then it was fine to see the lepers throwing their capes aside, and
stirring their sick legs, and brandishing their crutches, some
threatening: groaning all; but to strike them Tristan was too noble.
There are singers who sing that Tristan killed Ivan, but it is a lie.
Too much a knight was he to kill such things. Gorvenal indeed,
snatching up an oak sapling, crashed it on Ivan’s head till his blood
ran down to his misshapen feet. Then Tristan took the Queen.

Henceforth near him she felt no further evil. He cut the cords that
bound her arms so straightly, and he left the plain so that they
plunged into the wood of Morois; and there in the thick wood Tristan
was as sure as in a castle keep.

And as the sun fell they halted all three at the foot of a little
hill: fear had wearied the Queen, and she leant her head upon his body
and slept.

But in the morning, Gorvenal stole from a wood man his bow and two
good arrows plumed and barbed, and gave them to Tristan, the great
archer, and he shot him a fawn and killed it. Then Gorvenal gathered
dry twigs, struck flint, and lit a great fire to cook the venison. And
Tristan cut him branches and made a hut and garnished it with leaves.
And Iseult slept upon the thick leaves there.

So, in the depths of the wild wood began for the lovers that savage
life which yet they loved very soon.

PART THE SECOND

THE WOOD OF MOROIS

They wandered in the depths of the wild wood, restless and in haste
like beasts that are hunted, nor did they often dare to return by
night to the shelter of yesterday. They ate but the flesh of wild
animals. Their faces sank and grew white, their clothes ragged; for
the briars tore them. They loved each other and they did not know that
they suffered.

One day, as they were wandering in these high woods that had never yet
been felled or ordered, they came upon the hermitage of Ogrin.

The old man limped in the sunlight under a light growth of maples near
his chapel: he leant upon his crutch, and cried:

“Lord Tristan, hear the great oath which the Cornish men have sworn.
The King has published a ban in every parish: Whosoever may seize you
shall receive a hundred marks of gold for his guerdon, and all the
barons have sworn to give you up alive or dead. Do penance, Tristan!
God pardons the sinner who turns to repentance.”

“And of what should I repent, Ogrin, my lord? Or of what crime? You
that sit in judgment upon us here, do you know what cup it was we
drank upon the high sea? That good, great draught inebriates us both.
I would rather beg my life long and live of roots and herbs with
Iseult than, lacking her, be king of a wide kingdom.”

“God aid you, Lord Tristan; for you have lost both this world and the
next. A man that is traitor to his lord is worthy to be torn by horses
and burnt upon the faggot, and wherever his ashes fall no grass shall
grow and all tillage is waste, and the trees and the green things die.
Lord Tristan, give back the Queen to the man who espoused her lawfully
according to the laws of Rome.”

“He gave her to his lepers. From these lepers I myself conquered her
with my own hand; and henceforth she is altogether mine. She cannot
pass from me nor I from her.”

Ogrin sat down; but at his feet Iseult, her head upon the knees of
that man of God, wept silently. The hermit told her and re-told her
the words of his holy book, but still while she wept she shook her
head, and refused the faith he offered.

“Ah me,” said Ogrin then, “what comfort can one give the dead? Do
penance, Tristan, for a man who lives in sin without repenting is a
man quite dead.”

“Oh no,” said Tristan, “I live and I do no penance. We will go back
into the high wood which comforts and wards us all round about. Come
with me, Iseult, my friend.”

Iseult rose up; they held each other’s hands. They passed into the
high grass and the underwood: the trees hid them with their branches.
They disappeared beyond the leaves.

The summer passed and the winter came: the two lovers lived, all
hidden in the hollow of a rock, and on the frozen earth the cold
crisped their couch with dead leaves. In the strength of their love
neither one nor the other felt these mortal things. But when the open
skies had come back with the springtime, they built a hut of green
branches under the great trees. Tristan had known, ever since his
childhood, that art by which a man may sing the song of birds in the
woods, and at his fancy, he would call as call the thrush, the
blackbird and the nightingale, and all winged things; and sometimes in
reply very many birds would come on to the branches of his hut and
sing their song full-throated in the new light.

The lovers had ceased to wander through the forest, for none of the
barons ran the risk of their pursuit knowing well that Tristan would
have hanged them to the branches of a tree. One day, however, one of
the four traitors, Guenelon, whom God blast! drawn by the heat of the
hunt, dared enter the Morois. And that morning, on the forest edge in
a ravine, Gorvenal, having unsaddled his horse, had let him graze on
the new grass, while far off in their hut Tristan held the Queen, and
they slept. Then suddenly Gorvenal heard the cry of the pack; the
hounds pursued a deer, which fell into that ravine. And far on the
heath the hunter showed — and Gorvenal knew him for the man whom his
master hated above all. Alone, with bloody spurs, and striking his
horse’s mane, he galloped on; but Gorvenal watched him from ambush: he
came fast, he would return more slowly. He passed and Gorvenal leapt
from his ambush and seized the rein and, suddenly, remembering all the
wrong that man had done, hewed him to death and carried off his head
in his hands. And when the hunters found the body, as they followed,
they thought Tristan came after and they fled in fear of death, and
thereafter no man hunted in that wood. And far off, in the hut upon
their couch of leaves, slept Tristan and the Queen.

There came Gorvenal, noiseless, the dead man’s head in his hands that
he might lift his master’s heart at his awakening. He hung it by its
hair outside the hut, and the leaves garlanded it about. Tristan woke
and saw it, half hidden in the leaves, and staring at him as he gazed,
and he became afraid. But Gorvenal said: “Fear not, he is dead. I
killed him with this sword.”

Then Tristan was glad, and henceforward from that day no one dared
enter the wild wood, for terror guarded it and the lovers were lords
of it all: and then it was that Tristan fashioned his bow “Failnaught”
which struck home always, man or beast, whatever it aimed at.

My lords, upon a summer day, when mowing is, a little after
Whitsuntide, as the birds sang dawn Tristan left his hut and girt his
sword on him, and took his bow “Failnaught” and went off to hunt in
the wood; but before evening, great evil was to fall on him, for no
lovers ever loved so much or paid their love so dear.

When Tristan came back, broken by the heat, the Queen said

“Friend, where have you been?”

“Hunting a hart,” he said, “that wearied me. I would lie down and
sleep.”

So she lay down, and he, and between them Tristan put his naked sword,
and on the Queen’s finger was that ring of gold with emeralds set
therein, which Mark had given her on her bridal day; but her hand was
so wasted that the ring hardly held. And no wind blew, and no leaves
stirred, but through a crevice in the branches a sunbeam fell upon the
face of Iseult and it shone white like ice. Now a woodman found in the
wood a place where the leaves were crushed, where the lovers had
halted and slept, and he followed their track and found the hut, and
saw them sleeping and fled off, fearing the terrible awakening of that
lord. He fled to Tintagel, and going up the stairs of the palace,
found the King as he held his pleas in hall amid the vassals
assembled.

“Friend,” said the King, “what came you hither to seek in haste and
breathless, like a huntsman that has followed the dogs afoot? Have you
some wrong to right, or has any man driven you?”

But the woodman took him aside and said low down:

“I have seen the Queen and Tristan, and I feared and fled.”

“Where saw you them?”

“In a hut in Morois, they slept side by side. Come swiftly and take
your vengeance.”

“Go,” said the King, “and await me at the forest edge where the red
cross stands, and tell no man what you have seen. You shall have gold
and silver at your will.”

The King had saddled his horse and girt his sword and left the city
alone, and as he rode alone he minded him of the night when he had
seen Tristan under the great pine-tree, and Iseult with her clear
face, and he thought:

“If I find them I will avenge this awful wrong.”

At the foot of the red cross he came to the woodman and said:

“Go first, and lead me straight and quickly.”

The dark shade of the great trees wrapt them round, and as the King
followed the spy he felt his sword, and trusted it for the great blows
it had struck of old; and surely had Tristan wakened, one of the two
had stayed there dead. Then the woodman said:

“King, we are near.”

He held the stirrup, and tied the rein to a green apple-tree, and saw
in a sunlit glade the hut with its flowers and leaves. Then the King
cast his cloak with its fine buckle of gold and drew his sword from
its sheath and said again in his heart that they or he should die. And
he signed to the woodman to be gone.

He came alone into the hut, sword bare, and watched them as they lay:
but he saw that they were apart, and he wondered because between them
was the naked blade.

Then he said to himself: “My God, I may not kill them. For all the
time they have lived together in this wood, these two lovers, yet is
the sword here between them, and throughout Christendom men know that
sign. Therefore I will not slay, for that would be treason and wrong,
but I will do so that when they wake they may know that I found them
here, asleep, and spared them and that God had pity on them both.”

And still the sunbeam fell upon the white face of Iseult, and the King
took his ermined gloves and put them up against the crevice whence it
shone.

Then in her sleep a vision came to Iseult. She seemed to be in a great
wood and two lions near her fought for her, and she gave a cry and
woke, and the gloves fell upon her breast; and at the cry Tristan
woke, and made to seize his sword, and saw by the golden hilt that it
was the King’s. And the Queen saw on her finger the King’s ring, and
she cried:

“O, my lord, the King has found us here!”

And Tristan said:

“He has taken my sword; he was alone, but he will return, and will
burn us before the people. Let us fly.”

So by great marches with Gorvenal alone they fled towards Wales.

OGRIN THE HERMIT

After three days it happened that Tristan, in following a wounded deer
far out into the wood, was caught by night-fall, and took to thinking
thus under the dark wood alone:

“It was not fear that moved the King … he had my sword and I slept …
and had he wished to slay, why did he leave me his own blade? … O, my
father, my father, I know you now. There was pardon in your heart, and
tenderness and pity … yet how was that, for who could forgive in this
matter without shame? … It was not pardon it was understanding; the
faggot and the chantry leap and the leper ambush have shown him God
upon our side. Also I think he remembered the boy who long ago harped
at his feet, and my land of Lyonesse which I left for him; the
Morholt’s spear and blood shed in his honour. He remembered how I made
no avowal, but claimed a trial at arms, and the high nature of his
heart has made him understand what men around him cannot; never can he
know of the spell, yet he doubts and hopes and knows I have told no
lie, and would have me prove my cause. O, but to win at arms by God’s
aid for him, and to enter his peace and to put on mail for him again …
but then he must take her back, and I must yield her … it would have
been much better had he killed me in my sleep. For till now I was
hunted and I could hate and forget; he had thrown Iseult to the
lepers, she was no more his, but mine; and now by his compassion he
has wakened my heart and regained the Queen. For Queen she was at his
side, but in this wood she lives a slave, and I waste her youth; and
for rooms all hung with silk she has this savage place, and a hut for
her splendid walls, and I am the cause that she treads this ugly road.
So now I cry to God the Lord, who is King of the world, and beg Him to
give me strength to yield back Iseult to King Mark; for she is indeed
his wife, wed according to the laws of Rome before all the Barony of
his land.”

And as he thought thus, he leant upon his bow, and all through the
night considered his sorrow.

Within the hollow of thorns that was their resting-place Iseult the
Fair awaited Tristan’s return. The golden ring that King Mark had
slipped there glistened on her finger in the moonlight, and she
thought:

“He that put on this ring is not the man who threw me to his lepers in
his wrath; he is rather that compassionate lord who, from the day I
touched his shore, received me and protected. And he loved Tristan
once, but I came, and see what I have done! He should have lived in
the King’s palace; he should have ridden through King’s and baron’s
fees, finding adventure; but through me he has forgotten his
knighthood, and is hunted and exiled from the court, leading a random
life. …”

Just then she heard the feet of Tristan coming over the dead leaves
and twigs. She came to meet him, as was her wont, to relieve him of
his arms, and she took from him his bow, “Failnaught,” and his arrows,
and she unbuckled his sword-straps. And, “Friend,” said he, “it is the
King’s sword. It should have slain, but it spared us.”

Iseult took the sword, and kissed the hilt of gold, and Tristan saw
her weeping.

“Friend,” said he, “if I could make my peace with the King; if he
would allow me to sustain in arms that neither by act nor word have I
loved you with a wrongful love, any knight from the Marshes of Ely
right away to Dureaume that would gainsay me, would find me armed in
the ring. Then if the King would keep you and drive me out I would
cross to the Lowlands or to Brittany with Gorvenal alone. But wherever
I went and always, Queen, I should be yours; nor would I have spoken
thus, Iseult, but for the wretchedness you bear so long for my sake in
this desert land.”

“Tristan,” she said, “there is the hermit Ogrin. Let us return to him,
and cry mercy to the King of Heaven.”

They wakened Gorvenal; Iseult mounted the steed, and Tristan led it by
the bridle, and all night long they went for the last time through the
woods of their love, and they did not speak a word. By morning they
came to the Hermitage, where Ogrin read at the threshold, and seeing
them, called them tenderly:

“Friends,” he cried, “see how Love drives you still to further
wretchedness. Will you not do penance at last for your madness?”

“Lord Ogrin,” said Tristan, “hear us. Help us to offer peace to the
King, and I will yield him the Queen, and will myself go far away into
Brittany or the Lowlands, and if some day the King suffer me, I will
return and serve as I should.”

And at the hermit’s feet Iseult said in her turn:

“Nor will I live longer so, for though I will not say one word of
penance for my love, which is there and remains forever, yet from now
on I will be separate from him.”

Then the hermit wept and praised God and cried: “High King, I praise
Thy Name, for that Thou hast let me live so long as to give aid to
these!”

And he gave them wise counsel, and took ink, and wrote a little writ
offering the King what Tristan said.

That night Tristan took the road. Once more he saw the marble well and
the tall pine-tree, and he came beneath the window where the King
slept, and called him gently, and Mark awoke and whispered:

“Who are you that call me in the night at such an hour?”

“Lord, I am Tristan: I bring you a writ, and lay it here.”

Then the King cried: “Nephew! nephew! for God’s sake wait awhile,” but
Tristan had fled and joined his squire, and mounted rapidly. Gorvenal
said to him:

“O, Tristan, you are mad to have come. Fly hard with me by the nearest
road.”

So they came back to the Hermitage, and there they found Ogrin at
prayer, but Iseult weeping silently.

THE FORD

Mark had awakened his chaplain and had given him the writ to read; the
chaplain broke the seal, saluted in Tristan’s name, and then, when he
had cunningly made out the written words, told him what Tristan
offered; and Mark heard without saying a word, but his heart was glad,
for he still loved the Queen.

He summoned by name the choicest of his baronage, and when they were
all assembled they were silent and the King spoke:

“My lords, here is a writ, just sent me. I am your King, and you my
lieges. Hear what is offered me, and then counsel me, for you owe me
counsel.”

The chaplain rose, unfolded the writ, and said, upstanding

“My lords, it is Tristan that first sends love and homage to the King
and all his Barony, and he adds, ‘O King, when I slew the dragon and
conquered the King of Ireland’s daughter it was to me they gave her. I
was to ward her at will and I yielded her to you. Yet hardly had you
wed her when felons made you accept their lies, and in your anger,
fair uncle, my lord, you would have had us burnt without trial. But
God took compassion on us; we prayed him and he saved the Queen, as
justice was: and me also—though I leapt from a high rock, I was saved
by the power of God. And since then what have I done blameworthy? The
Queen was thrown to the lepers; I came to her succour and bore her
away. Could I have done less for a woman, who all but died innocent
through me? I fled through the woods. Nor could I have come down into
the vale and yielded her, for there was a ban to take us dead or
alive. But now, as then, I am ready, my lord, to sustain in arms
against all comers that never had the Queen for me, nor I for her a
love dishonourable to you. Publish the lists, and if I cannot prove my
right in arms, burn me before your men. But if I conquer and you take
back Iseult, no baron of yours will serve you as will I; and if you
will not have me, I will offer myself to the King of Galloway, or to
him of the Lowlands, and you will hear of me never again. Take
counsel, King, for if you will make no terms I will take back Iseult
to Ireland, and she shall be Queen in her own land.’”

When the barons of Cornwall heard how Tristan offered battle, they
said to the King:

“Sire, take back the Queen. They were madmen that belied her to you.
But as for Tristan, let him go and war it in Galloway, or in the
Lowlands. Bid him bring back Iseult on such a day and that soon.

Then the King called thrice clearly:

“Will any man rise in accusation against Tristan?”

And as none replied, he said to his chaplain:

“Write me a writ in haste. You have heard what you shall write. Iseult
has suffered enough in her youth. And let the writ be hung upon the
arm of the red cross before evening. Write speedily.”

Towards midnight Tristan crossed the Heath of Sand, and found the
writ, and bore it sealed to Ogrin; and the hermit read the letter;
“How Mark consented by the counsel of his barons to take back Iseult,
but not to keep Tristan for his liege. Rather let him cross the sea,
when, on the third day hence, at the Ford of Chances, he had given
back the Queen into King Mark’s hands.” Then Tristan said to the
Queen:

“O, my God! I must lose you, friend! But it must be, since I can thus
spare you what you suffer for my sake. But when we part for ever I
will give you a pledge of mine to keep, and from whatever unknown land
I reach I will send some messenger, and he will bring back word of
you, and at your call I will come from far away.”

Iseult said, sighing:

“Tristan, leave me your dog, Toothold, and every time I see him I will
remember you, and will be less sad. And, friend, I have here a ring of
green jasper. Take it for the love of me, and put it on your finger;
then if anyone come saying he is from you, I will not trust him at all
till he show me this ring, but once I have seen it, there is no power
or royal ban that can prevent me from doing what you bid—wisdom or
folly.”

“Friend,” he said, “here give I you Toothold.”

“Friend,” she replied, “take you this ring in reward.”

And they kissed each other on the lips.

Now Ogrin, having left the lovers in the Hermitage, hobbled upon his
crutch to the place called The Mount, and he bought ermine there and
fur and cloth of silk and purple and scarlet, and a palfrey harnessed
in gold that went softly, and the folk laughed to see him spending
upon these the small moneys he had amassed so long; but the old man
put the rich stuffs upon the palfrey and came back to Iseult.

And “Queen,” said he, “take these gifts of mine that you may seem the
finer on the day when you come to the Ford.”

Meanwhile the King had had cried through Cornwall the news that on the
third day he would make his peace with the Queen at the Ford, and
knights and ladies came in a crowd to the gathering, for all loved the
Queen and would see her, save the three felons that yet survived.

On the day chosen for the meeting, the field shone far with the rich
tents of the barons, and suddenly Tristan and Iseult came out at the
forest’s edge, and caught sight of King Mark far off among his Barony:

“Friend,” said Tristan, “there is the King, your lord—his knights and
his men; they are coming towards us, and very soon we may not speak to
each other again. By the God of Power I conjure you, if ever I send
you a word, do you my bidding.”

“Friend,” said Iseult, “on the day that I see the ring, nor tower, nor
wall, nor stronghold will let me from doing the will of my friend.”

“Why then,” he said, “Iseult, may God reward you.”

Their horses went abreast and he drew her towards him with his arm.

“Friend,” said Iseult, “hear my last prayer: you will leave this land,
but wait some days; hide till you know how the King may treat me,
whether in wrath or kindness, for I am afraid. Friend, Orri the
woodman will entertain you hidden. Go you by night to the abandoned
cellar that you know and I will send Perinis there to say if anyone
misuse me.”

“Friend, none would dare. I will stay hidden with Orri, and if any
misuse you let him fear me as the Enemy himself.”

Now the two troops were near and they saluted, and the King rode a
bow-shot before his men and with him Dinas of Lidan; and when the
barons had come up, Tristan, holding Iseult’s palfrey by the bridle,
bowed to the King and said:

“O King, I yield you here Iseult the Fair, and I summon you, before
the men of your land, that I may defend myself in your court, for I
have had no judgment. Let me have trial at arms, and if I am
conquered, burn me, but if I conquer, keep me by you, or, if you will
not, I will be off to some far country.”

But no one took up Tristan’s wager, and the King, taking Iseult’s
palfrey by the bridle, gave it to Dinas, and went apart to take
counsel.

Dinas, in his joy, gave all honour and courtesy to the Queen, but when
the felons saw her so fair and honoured as of old, they were stirred
and rode to the King, and said:

“King, hear our counsel. That the Queen was slandered we admit, but if
she and Tristan re-enter your court together, rumour will revive
again. Rather let Tristan go apart awhile. Doubtless some day you may
recall him.”

And so Mark did, and ordered Tristan by his barons to go off without
delay.

Then Tristan came near the Queen for his farewell, and as they looked
at one another the Queen in shame of that assembly blushed, but the
King pitied her, and spoke his nephew thus for the first time:

“You cannot leave in these rags; take then from my treasury gold and
silver and white fur and grey, as much as you will.”

“King,” said Tristan, “neither a penny nor a link of mail. I will go
as I can, and serve with high heart the mighty King in the Lowlands.”

And he turned rein and went down towards the sea, but Iseult followed
him with her eyes, and so long as he could yet be seen a long way off
she did not turn.

Now at the news of the peace, men, women, and children, great and
small, ran out of the town in a crowd to meet Iseult, and while they
mourned Tristan’s exile they rejoiced at the Queen’s return.

And to the noise of bells, and over pavings strewn with branches, the
King and his counts and princes made her escort, and the gates of the
palace were thrown open that rich and poor might enter and eat and
drink at will.

And Mark freed a hundred of his slaves, and armed a score of squires
that day with hauberk and with sword.

But Tristan that night hid with Orri, as the Queen had counselled him.

THE ORDEAL BY IRON

Denoalen, Andret, and Gondoin held themselves safe; Tristan was far
over sea, far away in service of a distant king, and they beyond his
power. Therefore, during a hunt one day, as the King rode apart in a
glade where the pack would pass, and hearkening to the hounds, they
all three rode towards him, and said:

“O King, we have somewhat to say. Once you condemned the Queen without
judgment, and that was wrong; now you acquit her without judgment, and
that is wrong. She is not quit by trial, and the barons of your land
blame you both. Counsel her, then, to claim the ordeal in God’s
judgment, for since she is innocent, she may swear on the relics of
the saints and hot iron will not hurt her. For so custom runs, and in
this easy way are doubts dissolved.”

But Mark answered:

“God strike you, my Cornish lords, how you hunt my shame! For you have
I exiled my nephew, and now what would you now? Would you have me
drive the Queen to Ireland too? What novel plaints have you to plead?
Did not Tristan offer you battle in this matter? He offered battle to
clear the Queen forever: he offered and you heard him all. Where then
were your lances and your shields?”

“Sire,” they said, “we have counselled you loyal counsel as lieges and
to your honour; henceforward we hold our peace. Put aside your anger
and give us your safe-guard.”

But Mark stood up in the stirrup and cried:

“Out of my land, and out of my peace, all of you! Tristan I exiled for
you, and now go you in turn, out of my land!”

But they answered:

“Sire, it is well. Our keeps are strong and fenced, and stand on rocks
not easy for men to climb.”

And they rode off without a salutation.

But the King (not tarrying for huntsman or for hound but straight
away) spurred his horse to Tintagel; and as he sprang up the stairs
the Queen heard the jangle of his spurs upon the stones.

She rose to meet him and took his sword as she was wont, and bowed
before him, as it was also her wont to do; but Mark raised her,
holding her hands; and when Iseult looked up she saw his noble face in
just that wrath she had seen before the faggot fire.

She thought that Tristan was found, and her heart grew cold, and
without a word she fell at the King’s feet.

He took her in his arms and kissed her gently till she could speak
again, and then he said:

“Friend, friend, what evil tries you?”

“Sire, I am afraid, for I have seen your anger.

“Yes, I was angered at the hunt.”

“My lord, should one take so deeply the mischances of a game?”

Mark smiled and said:

“No, friend; no chance of hunting vexed me, but those three felons
whom you know; and I have driven them forth from my land.”

“Sire, what did they say, or dare to say of me?”

“What matter? I have driven them forth.”

“Sire, all living have this right: to say the word they have
conceived. And I would ask a question, but from whom shall I learn
save from you? I am alone in a foreign land, and have no one else to
defend me.”

“They would have it that you should quit yourself by solemn oath and
by the ordeal of iron, saying ‘that God was a true judge, and that as
the Queen was innocent, she herself should seek such judgment as would
clear her for ever.’ This was their clamour and their demand
incessantly. But let us leave it. I tell you, I have driven them
forth.”

Iseult trembled, but looking straight at the King, she said:

“Sire, call them back; I will clear myself by oath. But I bargain
this: that on the appointed day you call King Arthur and Lord Gawain,
Girflet, Kay the Seneschal, and a hundred of his knights to ride to
the Sandy Heath where your land marches with his, and a river flows
between; for I will not swear before your barons alone, lest they
should demand some new thing, and lest there should be no end to my
trials. But if my warrantors, King Arthur and his knights, be there,
the barons will not dare dispute the judgment.”

But as the heralds rode to Carduel, Iseult sent to Tristan secretly
her squire Perinis: and he ran through the underwood, avoiding paths,
till he found the hut of Orri, the woodman, where Tristan for many
days had awaited news. Perinis told him all: the ordeal, the place,
and the time, and added:

“My lord, the Queen would have you on that day and place come dressed
as a pilgrim, so that none may know you—unarmed, so that none may
challenge —to the Sandy Heath. She must cross the river to the place
appointed. Beyond it, where Arthur and his hundred knights will stand,
be you also; for my lady fears the judgment, but she trusts in God.”

Then Tristan answered:

“Go back, friend Perinis, return you to the Queen, and say that I will
do her bidding.”

And you must know that as Perinis went back to Tintagel he caught
sight of that same woodman who had betrayed the lovers before, and the
woodman, as he found him, had just dug a pitfall for wolves and for
wild boars, and covered it with leafy branches to hide it, and as
Perinis came near the woodman fled, but Perinis drove him, and caught
him, and broke his staff and his head together, and pushed his body
into the pitfall with his feet.

On the appointed day King Mark and Iseult, and the barons of Cornwall,
stood by the river; and the knights of Arthur and all their host were
arrayed beyond.

And just before them, sitting on the shore, was a poor pilgrim,
wrapped in cloak and hood, who held his wooden platter and begged
alms.

Now as the Cornish boats came to the shoal of the further bank, Iseult
said to the knights:

“My lords, how shall I land without befouling my clothes in the
river-mud? Fetch me a ferryman.”

And one of the knights hailed the pilgrim, and said:

“Friend, truss your coat, and try the water; carry you the Queen to
shore, unless you fear the burden.”

But as he took the Queen in his arms she whispered to him:

“Friend.”

And then she whispered to him, lower still

“Stumble you upon the sand.”

And as he touched shore, he stumbled, holding the Queen in his arms;
and the squires and boatmen with their oars and boat-hooks drove the
poor pilgrim away.

But the Queen said:

“Let him be; some great travail and journey has weakened him.”

And she threw to the pilgrim a little clasp of gold.

Before the tent of King Arthur was spread a rich Nicean cloth upon the
grass, and the holy relics were set on it, taken out of their covers
and their shrines.

And round the holy relics on the sward stood a guard more than a
king’s guard, for Lord Gawain, Girflet, and Kay the Seneschal kept
ward over them.

The Queen having prayed God, took off the jewels from her neck and
hands, and gave them to the beggars around; she took off her purple
mantle, and her overdress, and her shoes with their precious stones,
and gave them also to the poor that loved her.

She kept upon her only the sleeveless tunic, and then with arms and
feet quite bare she came between the two kings, and all around the
barons watched her in silence, and some wept, for near the holy relics
was a brazier burning.

And trembling a little she stretched her right hand towards the bones
and said: “Kings of Logres and of Cornwall; my lords Gawain, and Kay,
and Girflet, and all of you that are my warrantors, by these holy
things and all the holy things of earth, I swear that no man has held
me in his arms saving King Mark, my lord, and that poor pilgrim. King
Mark, will that oath stand?”

“Yes, Queen,” he said, “and God see to it.

“Amen,” said Iseult, and then she went near the brazier, pale and
stumbling, and all were silent. The iron was red, but she thrust her
bare arms among the coals and seized it, and bearing it took nine
steps.

Then, as she cast it from her, she stretched her arms out in a cross,
with the palms of her hands wide open, and all men saw them fresh and
clean and cold. Seeing that great sight the kings and the barons and
the people stood for a moment silent, then they stirred together and
they praised God loudly all around.

PART THE THIRD

THE LITTLE FAIRY BELL

When Tristan had come back to Orri’s hut, and had loosened his heavy
pilgrim’s cape, he saw clearly in his heart that it was time to keep
his oath to King Mark and to fly the land.

Three days yet he tarried, because he could not drag himself away from
that earth, but on the fourth day he thanked the woodman, and said to
Gorvenal:

“Master, the hour is come.”

And he went into Wales, into the land of the great Duke Gilain, who
was young, powerful, and frank in spirit, and welcomed him nobly as a
God-sent guest.

And he did everything to give him honour and joy; but he found that
neither adventure, nor feast could soothe what Tristan suffered.

One day, as he sat by the young Duke’s side, his spirit weighed upon
him, so that not knowing it he groaned, and the Duke, to soothe him,
ordered into his private room a fairy thing, which pleased his eyes
when he was sad and relieved his own heart; it was a dog, and the
varlets brought it in to him, and they put it upon a table there. Now
this dog was a fairy dog, and came from the Duke of Avalon; for a
fairy had given it him as a love-gift, and no one can well describe
its kind or beauty. And it bore at its neck, hung to a little chain of
gold, a little bell; and that tinkled so gaily, and so clear and so
soft, that as Tristan heard it, he was soothed, and his anguish melted
away, and he forgot all that he had suffered for the Queen; for such
was the virtue of the bell and such its property: that whosoever heard
it, he lost all pain. And as Tristan stroked the little fairy thing,
the dog that took away his sorrow, he saw how delicate it was and
fine, and how it had soft hair like samite, and he thought how good a
gift it would make for the Queen. But he dared not ask for it right
out since he knew that the Duke loved this dog beyond everything in
the world, and would yield it to no prayers, nor to wealth, nor to
wile; so one day Tristan having made a plan in his mind said this:

“Lord, what would you give to the man who could rid your land of the
hairy giant Urgan, that levies such a toll?”

“Truly, the victor might choose what he would, but none will dare.”

Then said Tristan:

“Those are strange words, for good comes to no land save by risk and
daring, and not for all the gold of Milan would I renounce my desire
to find him in his wood and bring him down.”

Then Tristan went out to find Urgan in his lair, and they fought hard
and long, till courage conquered strength, and Tristan, having cut off
the giant’s hand, bore it back to the Duke.

And “Sire,” said he, “since I may choose a reward according to your
word, give me the little fairy dog. It was for that I conquered Urgan,
and your promise stands.”

“Friend,” said the Duke, “take it, then, but in taking it you take
away also all my joy.”

Then Tristan took the little fairy dog and gave it in ward to a Welsh
harper, who was cunning and who bore it to Cornwall till he came to
Tintagel, and having come there put it secretly into Brangien’s hands,
and the Queen was so pleased that she gave ten marks of gold to the
harper, but she put it about that the Queen of Ireland, her mother,
had sent the beast. And she had a goldsmith work a little kennel for
him, all jewelled, and incrusted with gold and enamel inlaid; and
wherever she went she carried the dog with her in memory of her
friend, and as she watched it sadness and anguish and regrets melted
out of her heart.

At first she did not guess the marvel, but thought her consolation was
because the gift was Tristan’s, till one day she found that it was
fairy, and that it was the little bell that charmed her soul; then she
thought: “What have I to do with comfort since he is sorrowing? He
could have kept it too and have forgotten his sorrow; but with high
courtesy he sent it to me to give me his joy and to take up his pain
again. Friend, while you suffer, so long will I suffer also.”

And she took the magic bell and shook it just a little, and then by
the open window she threw it into the sea.

ISEULT OF THE WHITE HANDS

Apart the lovers could neither live nor die, for it was life and death
together; and Tristan fled his sorrow through seas and islands and
many lands.

He fled his sorrow still by seas and islands, till at last he came
back to his land of Lyonesse, and there Rohalt, the keeper of faith,
welcomed him with happy tears and called him son. But he could not
live in the peace of his own land, and he turned again and rode
through kingdoms and through baronies, seeking adventure. From the
Lyonesse to the Lowlands, from the Lowlands on to the Germanies;
through the Germanies and into Spain. And many lords he served, and
many deeds did, but for two years no news came to him out of Cornwall,
nor friend, nor messenger. Then he thought that Iseult had forgotten.

Now it happened one day that, riding with Gorvenal alone, he came into
the land of Brittany. They rode through a wasted plain of ruined walls
and empty hamlets and burnt fields everywhere, and the earth deserted
of men; and Tristan thought:

“I am weary, and my deeds profit me nothing; my lady is far off and I
shall never see her again. Or why for two years has she made no sign,
or why has she sent no messenger to find me as I wandered? But in
Tintagel Mark honours her and she gives him joy, and that little fairy
bell has done a thorough work; for little she remembers or cares for
the joys and the mourning of old, little for me, as I wander in this
desert place. I, too, will forget.”

On the third day, at the hour of noon, Tristan and Gorvenal came near
a hill where an old chantry stood and close by a hermitage also; and
Tristan asked what wasted land that was, and the hermit answered:

“Lord, it is Breton land which Duke Hod holds, and once it was rich in
pasture and ploughland, but Count Riol of Nantes has wasted it. For
you must know that this Count Riol was the Duke’s vassal. And the Duke
has a daughter, fair among all King’s daughters, and Count Riol would
have taken her to wife; but her father refused her to a vassal, and
Count Riol would have carried her away by force. Many men have died in
that quarrel.”

And Tristan asked:

“Can the Duke wage his war?”

And the hermit answered:

“Hardly, my lord; yet his last keep of Carhaix holds out still, for
the walls are strong, and strong is the heart of the Duke’s son
Kaherdin, a very good knight and bold; but the enemy surrounds them on
every side and starves them. Very hardly do they hold their castle.”

Then Tristan asked:

“How far is this keep of Carhaix?”

“Sir,” said the hermit, “it is but two miles further on this way.”

Then Tristan and Gorvenal lay down, for it was evening.

In the morning, when they had slept, and when the hermit had chanted,
and had shared his black bread with them, Tristan thanked him and rode
hard to Carhaix. And as he halted beneath the fast high walls, he saw
a little company of men behind the battlements, and he asked if the
Duke were there with his son Kaherdin. Now Hod was among them; and
when he cried “yes,” Tristan called up to him and said:

“I am that Tristan, King of Lyonesse, and Mark of Cornwall is my
uncle. I have heard that your vassals do you a wrong, and I have come
to offer you my arms.

“Alas, lord Tristan, go you your way alone and God reward you, for
here within we have no more food; no wheat, or meat, or any stores but
only lentils and a little oats remaining.”

But Tristan said

“For two years I dwelt in a forest, eating nothing save roots and
herbs; yet I found it a good life, so open you the door.”

They welcomed him with honour, and Kaherdin showed him the wall and
the dungeon keep with all their devices, and from the battlements he
showed the plain where far away gleamed the tents of Duke Riol. And
when they were down in the castle again he said to Tristan:

“Friend, let us go to the hall where my mother and sister sit.”

So, holding each other’s hands, they came into the women’s room, where
the mother and the daughter sat together weaving gold upon English
cloth and singing a weaving song. They sang of Doette the fair who
sits alone beneath the white-thorn, and round about her blows the
wind. She waits for Doon, her friend, but he tarries long and does not
come. This was the song they sang. And Tristan bowed to them, and they
to him. Then Kaherdin, showing the work his mother did, said:

“See, friend Tristan, what a work-woman is here, and how marvellously
she adorns stoles and chasubles for the poor minsters, and how my
sister’s hands run thread of gold upon this cloth. Of right, good
sister, are you called, ‘Iseult of the White Hands.’”

But Tristan, hearing her name, smiled and looked at her more gently.

And on the morrow, Tristan, Kaherdin, and twelve young knights left
the castle and rode to a pinewood near the enemy’s tents. And sprang
from ambush and captured a waggon of Count Riol’s food; and from that
day, by escapade and ruse they would carry tents and convoys and kill
off men, nor ever come back without some booty; so that Tristan and
Kaherdin began to be brothers in arms, and kept faith and tenderness,
as history tells. And as they came back from these rides, talking
chivalry together, often did Kaherdin praise to his comrade his
sister, Iseult of the White Hands, for her simplicity and beauty.

One day, as the dawn broke, a sentinel ran from the tower through the
halls crying:

“Lords, you have slept too long; rise, for an assault is on.”

And knights and burgesses armed, and ran to the walls, and saw helmets
shining on the plain, and pennons streaming crimson, like flames, and
all the host of Riol in its array. Then the Duke and Kaherdin deployed
their horsemen before the gates, and from a bow-length off they
stooped, and spurred and charged, and they put their lances down
together and the arrows fell on them like April rain.

Now Tristan had armed himself among the last of those the sentinel had
roused, and he laced his shoes of steel, and put on his mail, and his
spurs of gold, his hauberk, and his helm over the gorget, and he
mounted and spurred, with shield on breast, crying:

“Carhaix!”

And as he came, he saw Duke Riol charging, rein free, at Kaherdin, but
Tristan came in between. So they met, Tristan and Duke Riol. And at
the shock, Tristan’s lance shivered, but Riol’s lance struck Tristan’s
horse just where the breast-piece runs, and laid it on the field.

But Tristan, standing, drew his sword, his burnished sword, and said:

“Coward! Here is death ready for the man that strikes the horse before
the rider.”

But Riol answered:

“I think you have lied, my lord!”

And he charged him.

And as he passed, Tristan let fall his sword so heavily upon his helm
that he carried away the crest and the nasal, but the sword slipped on
the mailed shoulder, and glanced on the horse, and killed it, so that
of force Duke Riol must slip the stirrup and leap and feel the ground.
Then Riol too was on his feet, and they both fought hard in their
broken mail, their ’scutcheons torn and their helmets loosened and
lashing with their dented swords, till Tristan struck Riol just where
the helmet buckles, and it yielded and the blow was struck so hard
that the baron fell on hands and knees; but when he had risen again,
Tristan struck him down once more with a blow that split the helm, and
it split the headpiece too, and touched the skull; then Riol cried
mercy and begged his life, and Tristan took his sword.

So he promised to enter Duke Hoël’s keep and to swear homage again,
and to restore what he had wasted; and by his order the battle ceased,
and his host went off discomfited.

Now when the victors were returned Kaherdin said to his father:

“Sire, keep you Tristan. There is no better knight, and your land has
need of such courage.”

So when the Duke had taken counsel with his barons, he said to Tristan

“Friend, I owe you my land, but I shall be quit with you if you will
take my daughter, Iseult of the White Hands, who comes of kings and of
queens, and of dukes before them in blood.”

And Tristan answered:

“I will take her, Sire.”

So the day was fixed, and the Duke came with his friends and Tristan
with his, and before all, at the gate of the minster, Tristan wed
Iseult of the White Hands, according to the Church’s law.

But that same night, as Tristan’s valets undressed him, it happened
that in drawing his arm from the sleeve they drew off and let fall
from his finger the ring of green jasper, the ring of Iseult the Fair.
It sounded on the stones, and Tristan looked and saw it. Then his
heart awoke and he knew that he had done wrong. For he remembered the
day when Iseult the Fair had given him the ring. It was in that forest
where, for his sake, she had led the hard life with him, and that
night he saw again the hut in the wood of Morois, and he was bitter
with himself that ever he had accused her of treason; for now it was
he that had betrayed, and he was bitter with himself also in pity for
this new wife and her simplicity and beauty. See how these two Iseults
had met him in an evil hour, and to both had he broken faith!

Now Iseult of the White Hands said to him, hearing him sigh:

“Dear lord, have I hurt you in anything? Will you not speak me a
single word?”

But Tristan answered: “Friend, do not be angry with me; for once in
another land I fought a foul dragon and was near to death, and I
thought of the Mother of God, and I made a vow to Her that, should I
ever wed, I would spend the first holy nights of my wedding in prayer
and in silence.”

“Why,” said Iseult, “that was a good vow.”

And Tristan watched through the night.

THE MADNESS OF TRISTAN

Within her room at Tintagel, Iseult the Fair sighed for the sake of
Tristan, and named him, her desire, of whom for two years she had had
no word, whether he lived or no.

Within her room at Tintagel Iseult the Fair sat singing a song she had
made. She sang of Guron taken and killed for his love, and how by
guile the Count gave Guron’s heart to her to eat, and of her woe. The
Queen sang softly, catching the harp’s tone; her hands were cunning
and her song good; she sang low down and softly.

Then came in Kariado, a rich count from a far-off island, that had
fared to Tintagel to offer the Queen his service, and had spoken of
love to her, though she disdained his folly. He found Iseult as she
sang, and laughed to her:

“Lady, how sad a song! as sad as the Osprey’s; do they not say he
sings for death? and your song means that to me; I die for you.”

And Iseult said: “So let it be and may it mean so; for never come you
here but to stir in me anger or mourning. Ever were you the screech
owl or the Osprey that boded ill when you spoke of Tristan; what news
bear you now?”

And Kariado answered:

“You are angered, I know not why, but who heeds your words? Let the
Osprey bode me death; here is the evil news the screech owl brings.
Lady Iseult, Tristan, your friend is lost to you. He has wed in a far
land. So seek you other where, for he mocks your love. He has wed in
great pomp Iseult of the White Hands, the King of Brittany’s
daughter.’’

And Kariado went off in anger, but Iseult bowed her head and broke
into tears.

Now far from Iseult, Tristan languished, till on a day he must needs
see her again. Far from her, death came surely; and he had rather die
at once than day by day. And he desired some death, but that the Queen
might know it was in finding her; then would death come easily.

So he left Carhaix secretly, telling no man, neither his kindred nor
even Kaherdin, his brother in arms. He went in rags afoot (for no one
marks the beggar on the high road) till he came to the shore of the
sea.

He found in a haven a great ship ready, the sail was up and the
anchor-chain short at the bow.

“God save you, my lords,” he said, “and send you a good journey. To
what land sail you now?”

“To Tintagel,” they said.

Then he cried out:

“Oh, my lords! take me with you thither!”

And he went aboard, and a fair wind filled the sail, and she ran five
days and nights for Cornwall, till, on the sixth day, they dropped
anchor in Tintagel Haven. The castle stood above, fenced all around.
There was but the one armed gate, and two knights watched it night and
day. So Tristan went ashore and sat upon the beach, and a man told him
that Mark was there and had just held his court.

“But where,” said he, “is Iseult, the Queen, and her fair maid,
Brangien?”

“In Tintagel too,” said the other, “and I saw them lately; the Queen
sad, as she always is.”

At the hearing of the name, Tristan suffered, and he thought that
neither by guile nor courage could he see that friend, for Mark would
kill him.

And he thought, “Let him kill me and let me die for her, since every
day I die. But you, Iseult, even if you knew me here, would you not
drive me out?” And he thought, “I will try guile. I will seem mad, but
with a madness that shall be great wisdom. And many shall think me a
fool that have less wit than I.”

Just then a fisherman passed in a rough cloak and cape, and Tristan
seeing him, took him aside, and said:

“Friend, will you not change clothes?”

And as the fisherman found it a very good bargain, he said in answer:

“Yes, friend, gladly.”

And he changed and ran off at once for fear of losing his gain. Then
Tristan shaved his wonderful hair; he shaved it close to his head and
left a cross all bald, and he rubbed his face with magic herbs
distilled in his own country, and it changed in colour and skin so
that none could know him, and he made him a club from a young tree
torn from a hedge-row and hung it to his neck, and went bare-foot
towards the castle.

The porter made sure that he had to do with a fool and said:

“Good morrow, fool, where have you been this long while?”

And he answered:

“At the Abbot of St. Michael’s wedding, and he wed an abbess, large
and veiled. And from the Alps to Mount St. Michael how they came, the
priests and abbots, monks and regulars, all dancing on the green with
croziers and with staves under the high trees’ shade. But I left them
all to come hither, for I serve at the King’s board to-day.”

Then the porter said:

“Come in, lord fool; the Hairy Urgan’s son, I know, and like your
father.”

And when he was within the courts the serving men ran after him and
cried:

“The fool! the fool!”

But he made play with them though they cast stones and struck him as
they laughed, and in the midst of laughter and their cries, as the
rout followed him, he came to that hall where, at the Queen’s side,
King Mark sat under his canopy.

And as he neared the door with his club at his neck, the King said:

“Here is a merry fellow, let him in.”

And they brought him in, his club at his neck. And the King said:

“Friend, well come; what seek you here?”

“Iseult,” said he, “whom I love so well; I bring my sister with me,
Brunehild, the beautiful. Come, take her, you are weary of the Queen.
Take you my sister and give me here Iseult, and I will hold her and
serve you for her love.”

The King said laughing:

“Fool, if I gave you the Queen, where would you take her, pray?”

“Oh! very high,” he said, “between the clouds and heaven, into a fair
chamber glazed. The beams of the sun shine through it, yet the winds
do not trouble it at all. There would I bear the Queen into that
crystal chamber of mine all compact of roses and the morning.”

The King and his barons laughed and said:

“Here is a good fool at no loss for words.”

But the fool as he sat at their feet gazed at Iseult most fixedly.

“Friend,” said King Mark, “what warrant have you that the Queen would
heed so foul a fool as you?”

“O! Sire,” he answered gravely, “many deeds have I done for her, and
my madness is from her alone.”

“What is your name?” they said, and laughed.

“Tristan,” said he, “that loved the Queen so well, and still till
death will love her.”

But at the name the Queen angered and weakened together, and said:
“Get hence for an evil fool!”

But the fool, marking her anger, went on:

“Queen Iseult, do you mind the day, when, poisoned by the Morholt’s
spear, I took my harp to sea and fell upon your shore? Your mother
healed me with strange drugs. Have you no memory, Queen?”

But Iseult answered:

“Out, fool, out! Your folly and you have passed the bounds!”

But the fool, still playing, pushed the barons out, crying:

“Out! madmen, out! Leave me to counsel with Iseult, since I come here
for the love of her!”

And as the King laughed, Iseult blushed and said:

“King, drive me forth this fool!”

But the fool still laughed and cried:

“Queen, do you mind you of the dragon I slew in your land? I hid its
tongue in my hose, and, burnt of its venom, I fell by the roadside.
Ah! what a knight was I then, and it was you that succoured me.”

Iseult replied:

“Silence! You wrong all knighthood by your words, for you are a fool
from birth. Cursed be the seamen that brought you hither; rather
should they have cast you into the sea!”

“Queen Iseult,” he still said on, “do you mind you of your haste when
you would have slain me with my own sword? And of the Hair of Gold?
And of how I stood up to the seneschal?”

“Silence!” she said, “you drunkard. You were drunk last night, and so
you dreamt these dreams.”

“Drunk, and still so am I,” said he, “but of such a draught that never
can the influence fade. Queen Iseult, do you mind you of that hot and
open day on the high seas? We thirsted and we drank together from the
same cup, and since that day have I been drunk with an awful wine.”

When the Queen heard these words which she alone could understand, she
rose and would have gone.

But the King held her by her ermine cloak, and she sat down again.

And as the King had his fill of the fool he called for his falcons and
went to hunt; and Iseult said to him:

“Sire, I am weak and sad; let me be go rest in my room; I am tired of
these follies.”

And she went to her room in thought and sat upon her bed and mourned,
calling herself a slave and saying:

“Why was I born? Brangien, dear sister, life is so hard to me that
death were better! There is a fool without, shaven criss-cross, and
come in an evil hour, and he is warlock, for he knows in every part
myself and my whole life; he knows what you and I and Tristan only
know.”

Then Brangien said: “It may be Tristan.”

But—“No,” said the Queen, “for he was the first of knights, but this
fool is foul and made awry. Curse me his hour and the ship that
brought him hither.”

“My lady!” said Brangien, “soothe you. You curse over much these days.
May be he comes from Tristan?”

“I cannot tell. I know him not. But go find him, friend, and see if
you know him.”

So Brangien went to the hall where the fool still sat alone. Tristan
knew her and let fall his club and said:

“Brangien, dear Brangien, before God! have pity on me!”

“Foul fool,” she answered, “what devil taught you my name?”

“Lady,” he said, “I have known it long. By my head, that once was
fair, if I am mad the blame is yours, for it was yours to watch over
the wine we drank on the high seas. The cup was of silver and I held
it to Iseult and she drank. Do you remember, lady?”

“No,” she said, and as she trembled and left he called out: “Pity me!”

He followed and saw Iseult. He stretched out his arms, but in her
shame, sweating agony she drew back, and Tristan angered and said:

“I have lived too long, for I have seen the day that Iseult will
nothing of me. Iseult, how hard love dies! Iseult, a welling water
that floods and runs large is a mighty thing; on the day that it fails
it is nothing; so love that turns.”

But she said

“Brother, I look at you and doubt and tremble, and I know you not for
Tristan.”

“Queen Iseult, I am Tristan indeed that do love you; mind you for the
last time of the dwarf, and of the flower, and of the blood I shed in
my leap. Oh! and of that ring I took in kisses and in tears on the day
we parted. I have kept that jasper ring and asked it counsel.”

Then Iseult knew Tristan for what he was, and she said:

“Heart, you should have broken of sorrow not to have known the man who
has suffered so much for you. Pardon, my master and my friend.”

And her eyes darkened and she fell; but when the light returned she
was held by him who kissed her eyes and her face.

So passed they three full days. But, on the third, two maids that
watched them told the traitor Andret, and he put spies well-armed
before the women’s rooms. And when Tristan would enter they cried:

“Back, fool!”

But he brandished his club laughing, and said:

“What! May I not kiss the Queen who loves me and awaits me now?”

And they feared him for a mad fool, and he passed in through the door.

Then, being with the Queen for the last time, he held her in his arms
and said:

“Friend, I must fly, for they are wondering. I must fly, and perhaps
shall never see you more. My death is near, and far from you my death
will come of desire.”

“Oh friend,” she said, “fold your arms round me close and strain me so
that our hearts may break and our souls go free at last. Take me to
that happy place of which you told me long ago. The fields whence none
return, but where great singers sing their songs for ever. Take me
now.”

“I will take you to the Happy Palace of the living, Queen! The time is
near. We have drunk all joy and sorrow. The time is near. When it is
finished, if I call you, will you come, my friend?”

“Friend,” said she, “call me and you know that I shall come.”

“Friend,” said he, “God send you His reward.”

As he went out the spies would have held him; but he laughed aloud,
and flourished his club, and cried:

“Peace, gentlemen, I go and will not stay. My lady sends me to prepare
that shining house I vowed her, of crystal, and of rose shot through
with morning.”

And as they cursed and drave him, the fool went leaping on his way.

THE DEATH OF TRISTAN

When he was come back to Brittany, to Carhaix, it happened that
Tristan, riding to the aid of Kaherdin his brother in arms, fell into
ambush and was wounded by a poisoned spear; and many doctors came, but
none could cure him of the ill. And Tristan weakened and paled, and
his bones showed.

Then he knew that his life was going, and that he must die, and he had
a desire to see once more Iseult the Fair, but he could not seek her,
for the sea would have killed him in his weakness, and how could
Iseult come to him? And sad, and suffering the poison, he awaited
death.

He called Kaherdin secretly to tell him his pain, for they loved each
other with a loyal love; and as he would have no one in the room save
Kaherdin, nor even in the neighbouring rooms, Iseult of the White
Hands began to wonder. She was afraid and wished to hear, and she came
back and listened at the wall by Tristan’s bed; and as she listened
one of her maids kept watch for her.

Now, within, Tristan had gathered up his strength, and had half risen,
leaning against the wall, and Kaherdin wept beside him. They wept
their good comradeship, broken so soon, and their friendship: then
Tristan told Kaherdin of his love for that other Iseult, and of the
sorrow of his life.

“Fair friend and gentle,” said Tristan, “I am in a foreign land where
I have neither friend nor cousin, save you; and you alone in this
place have given me comfort. My life is going, and I wish to see once
more Iseult the Fair. Ah, did I but know of a messenger who would go
to her! For now I know that she will come to me. Kaherdin, my brother
in arms, I beg it of your friendship; try this thing for me, and if
you carry my word, I will become your liege, and I will cherish you
beyond all other men.”

And as Kaherdin saw Tristan broken down, his heart reproached him and
he said:

“Fair comrade, do not weep; I will do what you desire, even if it were
risk of death I would do it for you. Nor no distress nor anguish will
let me from doing it according to my power. Give me the word you send,
and I will make ready.”

And Tristan answered:

“Thank you, friend; this is my prayer: take this ring, it is a sign
between her and me; and when you come to her land pass yourself at
court for a merchant, and show her silk and stuffs, but make so that
she sees the ring, for then she will find some ruse by which to speak
to you in secret. Then tell her that my heart salutes her; tell her
that she alone can bring me comfort; tell her that if she does not
come I shall die. Tell her to remember our past time, and our great
sorrows, and all the joy there was in our loyal and tender love. And
tell her to remember that draught we drank together on the high seas.
For we drank our death together. Tell her to remember the oath I swore
to serve a single love, for I have kept that oath.”

But behind the wall, Iseult of the White Hands heard all these things;
and Tristan continued:

“Hasten, my friend, and come back quickly, or you will not see me
again. Take forty days for your term, but come back with Iseult the
Fair. And tell your sister nothing, or tell her that you seek some
doctor. Take my fine ship, and two sails with you, one white, one
black. And as you return, if you bring Iseult, hoist the white sail;
but if you bring her not, the black. Now I have nothing more to say,
but God guide you and bring you back safe.”

With the first fair wind Kaherdin took the open, weighed anchor and
hoisted sail, and ran with a light air and broke the seas. They bore
rich merchandise with them, dyed silks of rare colours, enamel of
Touraine and wines of Poitou, for by this ruse Kaherdin thought to
reach Iseult. Eight days and nights they ran full sail to Cornwall.

Now a woman’s wrath is a fearful thing, and all men fear it, for
according to her love, so will her vengeance be; and their love and
their hate come quickly, but their hate lives longer than their love;
and they will make play with love, but not with hate. So Iseult of the
White Hands, who had heard every word, and who had so loved Tristan,
waited her vengeance upon what she loved most in the world. But she
hid it all; and when the doors were open again she came to Tristan’s
bed and served him with food as a lover should, and spoke him gently
and kissed him on the lips, and asked him if Kaherdin would soon
return with one to cure him … but all day long she thought upon her
vengeance.

And Kaherdin sailed and sailed till he dropped anchor in the haven of
Tintagel. He landed and took with him a cloth of rare dye and a cup
well chiselled and worked, and made a present of them to King Mark,
and courteously begged of him his peace and safeguard that he might
traffick in his land; and the King gave him his peace before all the
men of his palace.

Then Kaherdin offered the Queen a buckle of fine gold; and “Queen,”
said he, “the gold is good.”

Then taking from his finger Tristan’s ring, he put it side by side
with the jewel and said:

“See, O Queen, the gold of the buckle is the finer gold; yet that ring
also has its worth.”

When Iseult saw what ring that was, her heart trembled and her colour
changed, and fearing what might next be said she drew Kaherdin apart
near a window, as if to see and bargain the better; and Kaherdin said
to her, low down:

“Lady, Tristan is wounded of a poisoned spear and is about to die. He
sends you word that you alone can bring him comfort, and recalls to
you the great sorrows that you bore together. Keep you the ring—it is
yours.”

But Iseult answered, weakening:

“Friend, I will follow you; get ready your ship to-morrow at dawn.”

And on the morrow at dawn they raised anchor, stepped mast, and
hoisted sail, and happily the barque left land.

But at Carhaix Tristan lay and longed for Iseult’s coming. Nothing now
filled him any more, and if he lived it was only as awaiting her; and
day by day he sent watchers to the shore to see if some ship came, and
to learn the colour of her sail. There was no other thing left in his
heart.

He had himself carried to the cliff of the Penmarks, where it
overlooks the sea, and all the daylight long he gazed far off over the
water.

Hear now a tale most sad and pitiful to all who love. Already was
Iseult near; already the cliff of the Penmarks showed far away, and
the ship ran heartily, when a storm wind rose on a sudden and grew,
and struck the sail, and turned the ship all round about, and the
sailors bore away and sore against their will they ran before the
wind. The wind raged and big seas ran, and the air grew thick with
darkness, and the ocean itself turned dark, and the rain drove in
gusts. The yard snapped, and the sheet; they struck their sail, and
ran with wind and water. In an evil hour they had forgotten to haul
their pinnace aboard; it leapt in their wake, and a great sea broke it
away.

Then Iseult cried out: “God does not will that I should live to see
him, my love, once—even one time more. God wills my drowning in this
sea. O, Tristan, had I spoken to you but once again, it is little I
should have cared for a death come afterwards. But now, my love, I
cannot come to you; for God so wills it, and that is the core of my
grief.”

And thus the Queen complained so long as the storm endured; but after
five days it died down. Kaherdin hoisted the sail, the white sail,
right up to the very masthead with great joy; the white sail, that
Tristan might know its colour from afar: and already Kaherdin saw
Britanny far off like a cloud. Hardly were these things seen and done
when a calm came, and the sea lay even and untroubled. The sail
bellied no longer, and the sailors held the ship now up, now down, the
tide, beating backwards and forwards in vain. They saw the shore afar
off, but the storm had carried their boat away and they could not
land. On the third night Iseult dreamt this dream: that she held in
her lap a boar’s head which befouled her skirts with blood; then she
knew that she would never see her lover again alive.

Tristan was now too weak to keep his watch from the cliff of the
Penmarks, and for many long days, within walls, far from the shore, he
had mourned for Iseult because she did not come. Dolorous and alone,
he mourned and sighed in restlessness: he was near death from desire.

At last the wind freshened and the white sail showed. Then it was that
Iseult of the White Hands took her vengeance.

She came to where Tristan lay, and she said:

“Friend, Kaherdin is here. I have seen his ship upon the sea. She
comes up hardly—yet I know her; may he bring that which shall heal
thee, friend.”

And Tristan trembled and said:

“Beautiful friend, you are sure that the ship is his indeed? Then tell
me what is the manner of the sail?”

“I saw it plain and well. They have shaken it out and hoisted it very
high, for they have little wind. For its colour, why, it is black.”

And Tristan turned him to the wall, and said:

“I cannot keep this life of mine any longer.” He said three times:
“Iseult, my friend.” And in saying it the fourth time, he died.

Then throughout the house, the knights and the comrades of Tristan
wept out loud, and they took him from his bed and laid him on a rich
cloth, and they covered his body with a shroud. But at sea the wind
had risen; it struck the sail fair and full and drove the ship to
shore, and Iseult the Fair set foot upon the land. She heard loud
mourning in the streets, and the tolling of bells in the minsters and
the chapel towers; she asked the people the meaning of the knell and
of their tears. An old man said to her:

“Lady, we suffer a great grief. Tristan, that was so loyal and so
right, is dead. He was open to the poor; he ministered to the
suffering. It is the chief evil that has ever fallen on this land.”

But Iseult, hearing them, could not answer them a word. She went up to
the palace, following the way, and her cloak was random and wild. The
Bretons marvelled as she went; nor had they ever seen woman of such a
beauty, and they said:

“Who is she, or whence does she come?”

Near Tristan, Iseult of the White Hands crouched, maddened at the evil
she had done, and calling and lamenting over the dead man. The other
Iseult came in and said to her:

“Lady, rise and let me come by him; I have more right to mourn him
than have you—believe me. I loved him more.”

And when she had turned to the east and prayed God, she moved the body
a little and lay down by the dead man, beside her friend. She kissed
his mouth and his face, and clasped him closely; and so gave up her
soul, and died beside him of grief for her lover.

When King Mark heard of the death of these lovers, he crossed the sea
and came into Brittany; and he had two coffins hewn, for Tristan and
Iseult, one of chalcedony for Iseult, and one of beryl for Tristan.
And he took their beloved bodies away with him upon his ship to
Tintagel, and by a chantry to the left and right of the apse he had
their tombs built round. But in one night there sprang from the tomb
of Tristan a green and leafy briar, strong in its branches and in the
scent of its flowers. It climbed the chantry and fell to root again by
Iseult’s tomb. Thrice did the peasants cut it down, but thrice it grew
again as flowered and as strong. They told the marvel to King Mark,
and he forbade them to cut the briar any more.

The good singers of old time, Beroul and Thomas of Built, Gilbert and
Gottfried told this tale for lovers and none other, and, by my pen,
they beg you for your prayers. They greet those who are cast down, and
those in heart, those troubled and those filled with desire. May all
herein find strength against inconstancy and despite and loss and pain
and all the bitterness of loving.

THE END

Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co. at Paul’s Work, Edinburgh






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Romance Of Tristan And Iseult
by M. Joseph Bédier

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANCE OF TRISTAN AND ISEULT ***

***** This file should be named 14244-0.txt or 14244-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/2/4/14244/

Produced by Jeffrey Kraus-yao

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
