The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Younger Edda, by Snorre

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Younger Edda
       Also called Snorre's Edda, or The Prose Edda

Author: Snorre

Translator: Rasmus B. Anderson

Release Date: July 31, 2006 [EBook #18947]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNGER EDDA ***




Produced by Louise Hope, R. Cedron and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






               THE YOUNGER EDDA:

                  also called

       SNORRE’S EDDA, OR THE PROSE EDDA.

      An English Version of the Foreword;
     The Fooling of Gylfe, The Afterword;
 Brage’s Talk, The Afterword to Brage’s Talk,
       and the Important Passages in the
       Poetical Diction (Skaldskaparmal).

                    with an

  Introduction, Notes, Vocabulary, and Index.

         By RASMUS B. ANDERSON, LL.D.,

Formerly Professor of the Scandinavian Languages
        in the University of Wisconsin,
          Ex-U.S. Minister to Denmark,
 Author of “America Not Discovered By Columbus,”
“Norse Mythology,” “Viking Tales Of The North,” etc.


                    Chicago
          Scott, Foresman and Company
                      1901




               Copyright, 1879,
          By S. C. Griggs and Company.


                    Press of
           The Henry O. Shepard Co.
                    Chicago.




                       To

             HON. THOS. F. BAYARD,

     Ambassador to the Court of St. James,
           in Grateful Recollection
        of Pleasant Official Relations.




PREFACE.


In the beginning, before the heaven and the earth and the sea were
created, the great abyss Ginungagap was without form and void, and the
spirit of Fimbultyr moved upon the face of the deep, until the ice-cold
rivers, the Elivogs, flowing from Niflheim, came in contact with the
dazzling flames from Muspelheim. This was before Chaos.

And Fimbultyr said: Let the melted drops of vapor quicken into life, and
the giant Ymer was born in the midst of Ginungagap. He was not a god,
but the father of all the race of evil giants. This was Chaos.

And Fimbultyr said: Let Ymer be slain and let order be established. And
straightway Odin and his brothers--the bright sons of Bure--gave Ymer a
mortal wound, and from his body made they the universe; from his flesh,
the earth; from his blood, the sea; from his bones, the rocks; from
his hair, the trees; from his skull, the vaulted heavens; from his
eye-brows, the bulwark called Midgard. And the gods formed man and woman
in their own image of two trees, and breathed into them the breath of
life. Ask and Embla became living souls, and they received a garden in
Midgard as a dwelling-place for themselves and their children until the
end of time. This was Cosmos.

The world’s last day approaches. All bonds and fetters that bound the
forces of heaven and earth together are severed, and the powers of good
and of evil are brought together in an internecine feud. Loke advances
with the Fenris-wolf and the Midgard-serpent, his own children, with
all the hosts of the giants, and with Surt, who flings fire and flame
over the world. Odin advances with all the asas and all the blessed
einherjes. They meet, contend, and fall. The wolf swallows Odin but
Vidar, the Silent, sets his foot upon the monster’s lower jaw, he
seizes the other with his hand, and thus rends him till he dies. Frey
encounters Surt, and terrible blows are given ere Frey falls. Heimdal
and Loke fight and kill each other, and so do Tyr and the dog Garm from
the Gnipa Cave. Asa-Thor fells the Midgard-serpent with his Mjolner, but
he retreats only nine paces when he himself falls dead, suffocated by
the serpent’s venom. Then smoke wreathes up around the ash Ygdrasil,
the high flames play against the heavens, the graves of the gods, of
the giants and of men are swallowed up by the sea, and the end has come.
This is Ragnarok, the twilight of the gods.

But the radiant dawn follows the night. The earth, completely green,
rises again from the sea, and where the mews have but just been rocking
on restless waves, rich fields unplowed and unsown, now wave their
golden harvests before the gentle breezes. The asas awake to a new life,
Balder is with them again. Then comes the mighty Fimbultyr, the god who
is from everlasting to everlasting; the god whom the Edda skald dared
not name. The god of gods comes to the asas. He comes to the great
judgment and gathers all the good into Gimle to dwell there forever, and
evermore delights enjoy; but the perjurers and murderers and adulterers
he sends to Nastrand, that terrible hall, to be torn by Nidhug until
they are purged from their wickedness. This is Regeneration.

These are the outlines of the Teutonic religion. Such were the doctrines
established by Odin among our ancestors. Thus do we find it recorded in
the Eddas of Iceland.

The present volume contains all of the Younger Edda that can possibly be
of any importance to English readers. In fact, it gives more than has
ever before been presented in any translation into English, German or
any of the modern Scandinavian tongues.

We would recommend our readers to omit the Forewords and Afterwords
until they have perused the Fooling of Gylfe and Brage’s Speech. The
Forewords and Afterwords, it will readily be seen, are written by a
later and less skillful hand, and we should be sorry to have anyone lay
the book aside and lose the pleasure of reading Snorre’s and Olaf’s
charming work, because he became disgusted with what seemed to him mere
silly twaddle. And yet these Forewords and Afterwords become interesting
enough when taken up in connection with a study of the historical
anthropomorphized Odin. With a view of giving a pretty complete outline
of the founder of the Teutonic race we have in our notes given all the
Heimskringla sketch of the Black Sea Odin. We have done this, not only
on account of the material it furnishes as the groundwork of a Teutonic
epic, which we trust the muses will ere long direct some one to write,
but also on account of the vivid picture it gives of Teutonic life as
shaped and controlled by the Odinic faith.

All the poems quoted in the Younger Edda have in this edition been
traced back to their sources in the Elder Edda and elsewhere.

Where the notes seem to the reader insufficient, we must refer him to
our Norse Mythology, where he will, we trust, find much of the
additional information he may desire.

Well aware that our work has many imperfections, and begging our readers
to deal generously with our shortcomings, we send the book out into the
world with the hope that it may aid some young son or daughter of Odin
to find his way to the fountains of Urd and Mimer and to Idun’s
rejuvenating apples. The son must not squander, but husband wisely, what
his father has accumulated. The race must cherish and hold fast and add
to the thought that the past has bequeathed to it. Thus does it grow
greater and richer with each new generation. The past is the mirror that
reflects the future.

  R. B. ANDERSON.
  University of Wisconsin,
  Madison, Wis., _September, 1879_.



CONTENTS.


Preface                                          5

Introduction                                    15

Foreword                                        33


THE FOOLING OF GYLFE.

CHAPTER I.
Gefjun’s Plowing                                49

CHAPTER II.
Gylfe’s Journey to Asgard                       51

CHAPTER III.
Of the Highest God                              54

CHAPTER IV.
The Creation of the World                       56

CHAPTER V.
The Creation (continued)                        64

CHAPTER VI.
The First Works of the Asas--The Golden Age     69

CHAPTER VII.
On the Wonderful Things in Heaven               72

CHAPTER VIII.
The Asas                                        79

CHAPTER IX.
Loke and his Offspring                          91

CHAPTER X.
The Goddesses (Asynjes)                         97

CHAPTER XI.
The Giantess Gerd and Skirner’s Journey        101

CHAPTER XII.
Life in Valhal                                 104

CHAPTER XIII.
Odin’s Horse and Frey’s Ship                   109

CHAPTER XIV.
Thor’s Adventures                              113

CHAPTER XV.
The Death of Balder                            131

CHAPTER XVI.
Ragnarok                                       140

CHAPTER XVII.
Regeneration                                   147

Afterword to the Fooling of Gylfe              151


BRAGE’S TALK.

CHAPTER I.
Æger’s Journey to Asgard                       152

CHAPTER II.
Idun and her Apples                            155

CHAPTER III.
How Njord got Skade to Wife                    158

CHAPTER IV.
The Origin of Poetry                           160

Afterword to Brage’s Talk                      166


EXTRACTS FROM THE POETICAL DICTION.

Thor and Hrungner                              169
Thor’s Journey to Geirrod’s                    176
Idun                                           184
Æger’s Feast                                   187
Loke’s Wager with the Dwarfs                   189
The Niflungs and Gjukungs                      193
Menja and Fenja                                206
The Grottesong                                 208
Rolf Krake                                     214
Hogne and Hild                                 218


NOTES.

Enea                                           221
Herikon                                        221
The Historical Odin                            221
Fornjot and the Settlement of Norway           239
Notes to the Fooling of Gylfe                  242
Note on the Niflungs and Gjukungs              266
Note on Menja and Fenja                        267
Why the Sea is Salt                            268


VOCABULARY                                     275

INDEX                                          291



       *       *       *       *       *


               THE YOUNGER EDDA.


       *       *       *       *       *


INTRODUCTION.


The records of our Teutonic past have hitherto received but slight
attention from the English-speaking branch of the great world-ash
Ygdrasil. This indifference is the more deplorable, since a knowledge of
our heroic forefathers would naturally operate as a most powerful means
of keeping alive among us, and our posterity, that spirit of courage,
enterprise and independence for which the old Teutons were so
distinguished.

The religion of our ancestors forms an important chapter in the history
of the childhood of our race, and this fact has induced us to offer the
public an English translation of the Eddas. The purely mythological
portion of the Elder Edda was translated and published by A. S. Cottle,
in Bristol, in 1797, and the whole work was translated by Benjamin
Thorpe, and published in London in 1866. Both these works are now out of
print. Of the Younger Edda we have likewise had two translations into
English,--the first by Dasent in 1842, the second by Blackwell, in his
edition of Mallet’s Northern Antiquities, in 1847. The former has long
been out of print, the latter is a poor imitation of Dasent’s. Both of
them are very incomplete. These four books constitute all the Edda
literature we have had in the English language, excepting, of course,
single lays and chapters translated by Gray, Henderson, W. Taylor,
Herbert, Jamieson, Pigott, William and Mary Howitt, and others.

The Younger Edda (also called Snorre’s Edda, or the Prose Edda), of
which we now have the pleasure of presenting our readers an English
version, contains, as usually published in the original, the following
divisions:

1. The Foreword.

2. Gylfaginning (The Fooling of Gylfe).

3. The Afterword to Gylfaginning.

4. Brage’s Speech.

5. The Afterword.

6. Skaldskaparmal (a collection of poetic paraphrases, and denominations
in Skaldic language without paraphrases).

7. Hattatal (an enumeration of metres; a sort of Clavis Metrica).

In some editions there are also found six additional chapters on the
alphabet, grammar, figures of speech, etc.

There are three important parchment manuscripts of the Younger Edda,
viz:

1. _Codex Regius_, the so-called King’s Book. This was presented to the
Royal Library in Copenhagen, by Bishop Brynjulf Sveinsson, in the year
1640, where it is still kept.

2. _Codex Wormianus_. This is found in the University Library in
Copenhagen, in the Arne Magnæan collection. It takes its name from
Professor Ole Worm [died 1654], to whom it was presented by the learned
Arngrim Jonsson. Christian Worm, the grandson of Ole Worm, and Bishop of
Seeland [died 1737], afterward presented it to Arne Magnusson.

3. _Codex Upsaliensis_. This is preserved in the Upsala University
Library. Like the other two, it was found in Iceland, where it was given
to Jon Rugmann. Later it fell into the hands of Count Magnus Gabriel de
la Gardie, who in the year 1669 presented it to the Upsala University.
Besides these three chief documents, there exist four fragmentary
parchments, and a large number of paper manuscripts.

The first printed edition of the Younger Edda, in the original, is the
celebrated “Edda Islandorum,” published by Peter Johannes Resen, in
Copenhagen, in the year 1665. It contains a translation into Latin, made
partly by Resen himself, and partly also by Magnus Olafsson, Stephan
Olafsson and Thormod Torfason.

Not until eighty years later, that is in 1746, did the second edition of
the Younger Edda appear in Upsala under the auspices of Johannes
Goransson. This was printed from the Codex Upsaliensis.

In the present century we find a third edition by Rasmus Rask, published
in Stockholm in 1818. This is very complete and critical. The fourth
edition was issued by Sveinbjorn Egilsson, in Reykjavik, 1849; the fifth
by the Arne-Magnæan Commission in Copenhagen, 1852.[1] All these five
editions have long been out of print, and in place of them we have a
sixth edition by Thorleif Jonsson (Copenhagen, 1875), and a seventh by
Ernst Wilkin (Paderborn, 1877). Both of these, and especially the
latter, are thoroughly critical and reliable.

    [Footnote 1: The third volume of this work has not yet appeared.]

Of translations, we must mention in addition to those into English by
Dasent and Blackwell, R. Nyerup’s translation into Danish (Copenhagen,
1808); Karl Simrock’s into German (Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1851); and
Fr. Bergmann’s into French (Paris, 1871). Among the chief authorities to
be consulted in the study of the Younger Edda may be named, in addition
to those already mentioned, Fr. Dietrich, Th. Mobius, Fr. Pfeiffer,
Ludw. Ettmuller, K. Hildebrand, Ludw. Uhland, P. E. Muller, Adolf
Holzmann, Sophus Bugge, P. A. Munch and Rudolph Keyser. For the material
in our introduction and notes, we are chiefly indebted to Simrock,
Wilkin and Keyser. While we have had no opportunity of making original
researches, the published works have been carefully studied, and all we
claim for our work is, that it shall contain the results of the latest
and most thorough investigations by scholars who live nearer the
fountains of Urd and Mimer than do we. Our translations are made from
Egilsson’s, Jonsson’s and Wilkins’ editions of the original. We have not
translated any of the Hattatal, and only the narrative part of
Skaldskaparmal, and yet our version contains more of the Younger Edda
than any English, German, French or Danish translation that has hitherto
been published. The parts omitted cannot possibly be of any interest to
any one who cannot read them in the original. All the paraphrases of the
asas and asynjes, of the world, the earth, the sea, the sun, the wind,
fire, summer, man, woman, gold, of war, arms, of a ship, emperor, king,
ruler, etc., are of interest only as they help to explain passages of
Old Norse poems. The same is true of the enumeration of metres, which
contains a number of epithets and metaphors used by the scalds,
illustrated by specimens of their poetry, and also by a poem of Snorre
Sturleson, written in one hundred different metres.

There has been a great deal of learned discussion in regard to the
authorship of the Younger Edda. Readers specially interested in this
knotty subject we must refer to Wilkins’ elaborate treatise,
Untersuchungen zur Snorra Edda (Paderborn, 1878), and to P. E. Muller’s,
Die Æchtheit der Asalehre (Copenhagen, 1811).

Two celebrated names that without doubt are intimately connected with
the work are Snorre Sturleson and Olaf Thordsson Hvitaskald. Both of
these are conspicuous, not only in the literary, but also in the
political history of Iceland.

    [Footnote 2: Keyser.]

Snorre Sturleson[2] was born in Iceland in the year 1178. Three years
old, he came to the house of the distinguished chief, Jon Loptsson, at
Odde, a grandson of Sæmund the Wise, the reputed collector of the Elder
Edda, where he appears to have remained until Jon Loptsson’s death, in
the year 1197. Soon afterward Snorre married into a wealthy family, and
in a short time he became one of the most distinguished leaders in
Iceland, He was several times elected chief magistrate, and no man in
the land was his equal in riches and prominence. He and his two elder
brothers, Thord and Sighvat, who were but little inferior to him in
wealth and power, were at one time well-nigh supreme in Iceland, and
Snorre sometimes appeared at the Althing at Thingvols accompanied by
from eight hundred to nine hundred armed men.

Snorre and his brothers did not only have bitter feuds with other
families, but a deadly hatred also arose between themselves, making
their lives a perpetual warfare. Snorre was shrewd as a politician and
magistrate, and eminent as an orator and skald, but his passions were
mean, and many of his ways were crooked. He was both ambitious and
avaricious. He is said to have been the first Icelander who laid plans
to subjugate his fatherland to Norway, and in this connection is
supposed to have expected to become a jarl under the king of Norway.
In this effort he found himself outwitted by his brother’s son, Sturle
Thordsson, and thus he came into hostile relations with the latter. In
this feud Snorre was defeated, but when Sturle shortly after fell in a
battle against his foes, Snorre’s star of hope rose again, and he began
to occupy himself with far-reaching, ambitious plans. He had been for
the first time in Norway during the years 1218-1220, and had been well
received by King Hakon, and especially by Jarl Skule, who was then the
most influential man in the country. In the year 1237 Snorre visited
Norway again, and entered, as it is believed, into treasonable
conspiracies with Jarl Skule. In 1239 he left Norway against the wishes
of King Hakon, whom he owed obedience, and thereby incurred the king’s
greatest displeasure. When King Hakon, in 1240, had crushed Skule’s
rebellion and annihilated this dangerous opponent, it became Snorre’s
turn to feel the effects of the king’s wrath. At the instigation of King
Hakon, several chiefs of Iceland united themselves against Snorre and
murdered him at Reykholt, where ruins of his splendid mansion are still
to be seen. This event took place on the 22d of September, 1241, and
Snorre Sturleson was then sixty-three years old. Snorre was Iceland’s
most distinguished skald and sagaman. As a writer of history he deserves
to be compared with Herodotos or Thukydides. His Heimskringla, embracing
an elaborate history of the kings of Norway, is famous throughout the
civilized world, and Emerson calls it the Iliad and Odyssey of our race.
An English translation of this work was published by Samuel Laing, in
London, in 1844. Carlyle’s Early Kings of Norway (London, 1875) was
inspired by the Heimskringla.

Olaf Thordsson, surnamed Hvitaskald,[3] to distinguish him from his
contemporary, Olaf Svartaskald,[4] was a son of Snorre’s brother. Though
not as prominent and influential as his uncle, he took an active part in
all the troubles of his native island during the first half of the
thirteenth century. He visited Norway in 1236, whence he went to
Denmark, where he was a guest at the court of King Valdemar, and is said
to have enjoyed great esteem. In 1240 we find him again in Norway, where
he espoused the cause of King Hakon against Skule. On his return to
Iceland he served four years as chief magistrate of the island. His
death occurred in the year 1259, and he is numbered among the great
skalds of Iceland.

    [Footnote 3: White Skald.]

    [Footnote 4: Black Skald.]

Snorre Sturleson and Olaf Hvitaskald are the two names to whom the
authorship of the Younger Edda has generally been attributed, and the
work is by many, even to this day, called Snorra Edda--that is, Snorre’s
Edda. We do not propose to enter into any elaborate discussion of this
complicated subject, but we will state briefly the reasons given by
Keyser and others for believing that these men had a hand in preparing
the Prose Edda. In the first place, we find that the writer of the
grammatical and rhetorical part of the Younger Edda distinctly mentions
Snorre as author of Hattatal (the Clavis Metrica), and not only of the
poem itself, but also of the treatise in prose. In the second place, the
Arne Magnæan parchment manuscript, which dates back to the close of the
thirteenth or beginning of the fourteenth century, has the following
note prefaced to the Skaldskaparmal. “Here ends that part of the book
which Olaf Thordsson put together, and now begins Skaldskaparmal and the
Kenningar, according to that which has been found in the lays of the
chief skalds, and which Snorre afterward suffered to be brought
together.” In the third place, the Upsala manuscript of the Younger
Edda, which is known with certainty to have been written in the
beginning of the fourteenth century, contains this preface, written with
the same hand as the body of the work: “This book hight Edda. Snorre has
compiled it in the manner in which it is arranged: first, in regard to
the asas and Ymer, then Skaldskaparmal and the denominations of many
things, and finally that Hattatal, which Snorre composed about King
Hakon and Duke Skule.” In the fourth place, there is a passage in the
so-called Annales Breviores, supposed to have been written about the
year 1400. The passage relates to the year 1241, and reads thus: “Snorre
Sturleson died at Reykholt. He was a wise and very learned man, a great
chief and shrewd. He was the first man in this land who brought property
into the hands of the king (the king of Norway). He compiled Edda and
many other learned historical works and Icelandic sagas. He was murdered
at Reykholt by Jarl Gissur’s men.”

It seems, then, that there is no room for any doubt that these two men
have had a share in the authorship of the Younger Edda. How great a
share each has had is another and more difficult problem to solve.
Rudolf Keyser’s opinion is (and we know no higher authority on the
subject), that Snorre is the author, though not in so strict a sense as
we now use the word, of Gylfaginning, Brage’s Speech, Skaldskaparmal and
Hattatal. This part of the Younger Edda may thus be said to date back to
the year 1230, though the material out of which the mythological system
is constructed is of course much older. We find it in the ancient Vala’s
Prophecy, of the Elder Edda, a poem that breathes in every line the
purest asa-faith, and is, without the least doubt, much older than the
introduction of christianity in the north, or the discovery and
settlement of Iceland. It is not improbable that the religious system of
the Odinic religion had assumed a permanent prose form in the memories
of the people long before the time of Snorre, and that he merely was the
means of having it committed to writing almost without verbal change.

Olaf Thordsson is unmistakably the author of the grammatical and
rhetorical portion of the Younger Edda, and its date can therefore
safely be put at about 1250. The author of the treatise on the alphabet
is not known, but Professor Keyser thinks it must have been written, its
first chapter, about the year 1150, and its second chapter about the
year 1200. The forewords and afterwords are evidently also from another
pen. Their author is unknown, but they are thought to have been written
about the year 1300. To sum up, then, we arrive at this conclusion: The
mythological material of the Younger Edda is as old as the Teutonic
race. Parts of it are written by authors unknown to fame. A small
portion is the work of Olaf Thordsson. The most important portion is
written, or perhaps better, compiled, by Snorre Sturleson, and the whole
is finally edited and furnished with forewords and afterwords, early in
the fourteenth century,--according to Keyser, about 1320-1330.

About the name Edda there has also been much learned discussion. Some
have suggested that it may be a mutilated form of the word Odde, the
home of Sæmund the Wise, who was long supposed to be the compiler of the
Elder Edda. In this connection, it has been argued that possibly Sæmund
had begun the writing of the Younger Edda, too. Others derive the word
from _óðr_ (mind, soul), which in poetical usage also means song,
poetry. Others, again, connect Edda with the Sanscrit word Veda, which
is supposed to mean knowledge. Finally, others adopt the meaning which
the word has where it is actually used in the Elder Edda, and where it
means great-grandmother. Vigfusson adopts this definition, and it is
certainly both scientific and poetical. What can be more beautiful than
the idea that our great ancestress teaches her descendants the sacred
traditions, the concentrated wisdom, of the race? To sum up, then,
we say the Younger, or Prose, or Snorre’s Edda has been produced at
different times by various hands, and the object of its authors has been
to produce a manual for the skalds. In addition to the forewords and
afterwords, it contains two books, one greater (Gylfaginning) and one
lesser (Brage’s Speech), giving a tolerably full account of Norse
mythology. Then follows Skaldskaparmal, wherein is an analysis of the
various circumlocutions practiced by the skalds, all illustrated by
copious quotations from the poets. How much of these three parts is
written by Snorre is not certain, but on the other hand, there is no
doubt that he is the author of Hattatal (Clavis Metrica), which gives an
enumeration of metres. To these four treatises are added four chapters
on grammar and rhetoric. The writer of the oldest grammatical treatise
is thought to be one Thorodd Runemaster, who lived in the middle of the
twelfth century; and the third treatise is evidently written by Olaf
Thordsson Hvitaskald, the nephew of Snorre, a scholar who spent some
time at the court of the Danish king, Valdemar the Victorious.

The Younger Edda contains the systematized theogony and cosmogony of our
forefathers, while the Elder Edda presents the Odinic faith in a series
of lays or rhapsodies. The Elder Edda is poetry, while the Younger Edda
is mainly prose. The Younger Edda may in one sense be regarded as the
sequel or commentary of the Elder Edda. Both complement each other, and
both must be studied in connection with the sagas and all the Teutonic
traditions and folk-lore in order to get a comprehensive idea of the
asa-faith. The two Eddas constitute, as it were, the Odinic Bible. The
Elder Edda is the Old Testament, the Younger Edda the New. Like the Old
Testament, the Elder Edda is in poetry. It is prophetic and enigmatical.
Like the New Testament, the Younger Edda is in prose; it is lucid, and
gives a clue to the obscure passages in the Elder Edda. Nay, in many
respects do the two Eddas correspond with the two Testaments of the
Christian Bible.

It is a deplorable fact that the religion of our forefathers seems to be
but little cared for in this country. The mythologies of other nations
every student manifests an interest for. He reads with the greatest zeal
all the legends of Rome and Greece, of India and China. He is familiar
with every room in the labyrinth of Crete, while when he is introduced
to the shining halls of Valhal and Gladsheim he gropes his way like a
blind man. He does not know that Idun, with her beautiful apples, might,
if applied to, render even greater services than Ariadne with her
wonderful thread. When we inquire whom Tuesday and Wednesday and
Thursday and Friday are named after, and press questions in reference to
Tyr, Odin, Thor and Freyja, we get at best but a wise and knowing look.
Are we, then, as a nation, like the ancient Jews, and do we bend the
knee before the gods of foreign nations and forsake the altars of our
own gods? What if we then should suffer the fate of that unhappy
people--be scattered over all the world and lose our fatherland? In
these Eddas our fathers have bequeathed unto us all their profoundest,
all their sublimest, all their best thought. They are the concentrated
result of their greatest intellectual and spiritual effort, and it
behooves us to cherish this treasure and make it the fountain at which
the whole American branch of the Ygdrasil ash may imbibe a united
national sentiment. It is not enough to brush the dust off these gods
and goddesses of our ancestors and put them up on pedestals as ornaments
in our museums and libraries. These coins of the past are not to be laid
away in numismatic collections. The grandson must use what he has
inherited from his grandfather. If the coin is not intelligible, then it
will have to be sent to the mint and stamped anew, in order that it may
circulate freely. Our ancestral deities want a place in our hearts and
in our songs.

On the European continent and in England the zeal of the priests in
propagating Christianity was so great that they sought to root out every
trace of the asa-faith. They left but unintelligible fragments of the
heathen religious structure. Our gods and goddesses and heroes were
consigned to oblivion, and all knowledge of the Odinic religion and of
the Niblung-story would have been well nigh totally obliterated had not
a more lucky star hovered over the destinies of Iceland. In this
remotest corner of the world the ancestral spirit was preserved like the
glowing embers of Hekla beneath the snow and ice of the glacier. From
the farthest Thule the spirit of our fathers rises and shines like an
aurora over all Teutondom. It was in the year 860 that Iceland was
discovered. In 874 the Teutonic spirit fled thither for refuge from
tyranny. Here a government based on the principles of old Teutonic
liberty was established. From here went forth daring vikings, who
discovered Greenland and Vinland, and showed Columbus the way to
America. From here the courts of Norway, Sweden, Denmark, England and
Germany were supplied with skalds to sing their praises. Here was put in
writing the laws and sagas that give us a clue to the form of old
Teutonic institutions. Here was preserved the Old Norse language, and in
it a record of the customs, the institutions and the religion of our
fathers. Its literature does not belong to that island alone,--it
belongs to the whole Teutonic race! Iceland is for the Teutons what
Greece and Rome are for the south of Europe, and she accomplished her
mission with no less efficiency and success. Cato the Elder used to end
all his speeches with these words: _“Præterea censeo Carthaginem esse
delendam.”_ In these days, when so many worship at the shrine of
Romanism, we think it perfectly just to adopt Cato’s sentence in this
form: _Præterea censeo Romam esse delendam_.




FOREWORD.


1. In the beginning Almighty God created heaven and earth, and all
things that belong to them, and last he made two human beings, from whom
the races are descended (Adam and Eve), and their children multiplied
and spread over all the world. But in the course of time men became
unequal; some were good and right-believing, but many more turned them
after the lusts of the world and heeded not God’s laws; and for this
reason God drowned the world in the flood, and all that was quick in the
world, except those who were in the ark with Noah. After the flood of
Noah there lived eight men, who inhabited the world, and from them the
races are descended; and now, as before, they increased and filled the
world, and there were very many men who loved to covet wealth and power,
but turned away from obedience to God, and so much did they do this that
they would not name God. And who could then tell their sons of the
wonderful works of God? So it came to pass that they lost God’s name;
and in the wide world the man was not to be found who could tell of his
Maker. But, nevertheless, God gave them earthly-gifts, wealth and
happiness, that should be with them in the world; he also shared wisdom
among them, so that they understood all earthly things, and all kinds
that might be seen in the air and on the earth. This they thought upon,
and wondered at, how it could come to pass that the earth and the beasts
and the birds had the same nature in some things but still were unlike
in manners.

One evidence of this nature was that the earth might be dug into upon
high mountain-peaks and water would spring up there, and it was not
necessary to dig deeper for water there than in deep dales; thus, also,
in beasts and birds it is no farther to the blood in the head than in
the feet. Another proof of this nature is, that every year there grow on
the earth grass and flowers, and the same year it falls and withers;
thus, also, on beasts and birds do hair and feathers grow and fall off
each year. The third nature of the earth is, that when it is opened and
dug into, then grass grows on the mould which is uppermost on the earth.
Rocks and stones they explained to correspond to the teeth and bones of
living things. From these things they judged that the earth must be
quick and must have life in some way, and they knew that it was of a
wonderfully great age and of a mighty nature. It nourished all that was
quick and took to itself all that died. On this account they gave it a
name, and numbered their ancestors back to it This they also learned
from their old kinsmen, that when many hundred winters were numbered,
the course of the heavenly bodies was uneven; some had a longer course
than others. From such things they suspected that some one must be the
ruler of the heavenly bodies who could stay their course at his own
will, and he must be strong and mighty; and of him they thought that, if
he ruled the prime elements, he must also have been before the heavenly
bodies, and they saw that, if he ruled the course of the heavenly
bodies, he must rule the sunshine, and the dew of the heavens, and the
products of the earth that follow them; and thus, also, the winds of the
air and therewith the storms of the sea. They knew not where his realm
was, but they believed that he ruled over all things on the earth and in
the air, over the heavens and the heavenly bodies, the seas and the
weather. But in order that these things might be better told and
remembered, they gave him the same name with themselves, and this belief
has been changed in many ways, as the peoples have been separated and
the tongues have been divided.

2. In his old age Noah shared the world with his sons: for Ham he
intended the western region, for Japheth the northern region, but for
Shem the southern region, with those parts which will hereafter be
marked out in the division of the earth into three parts. In the time
that the sons of these men were in the world, then increased forthwith
the desire for riches and power, from the fact that they knew many
crafts that had not been discovered before, and each one was exalted
with his own handiwork; and so far did they carry their pride, that the
Africans, descended from Ham, harried in that part of the world which
the offspring of Shem, their kinsman, inhabited. And when they had
conquered them, the world seemed to them too small, and they smithied a
tower with tile and stone, which they meant should reach to heaven, on
the plain called Sennar. And when this building was so far advanced that
it extended above the air, and they were no less eager to continue the
work, and when God saw how their pride waxed high, then he sees that he
will have to strike it down in some way. And the same God, who is
almighty, and who might have struck down all their work in the twinkling
of an eye, and made themselves turn into dust, still preferred to
frustrate their purpose by making them realize their own littleness, in
that none of them should understand what the other talked; and thus no
one knew what the other commanded, and one broke what the other wished
to build up, until they came to strife among themselves, and therewith
was frustrated, in the beginning, their purpose of building a tower. And
he who was foremost, hight Zoroaster, he laughed before he wept when he
came into the world; but the master-smiths were seventy-two, and so many
tongues have spread over the world since the giants were dispersed over
the land, and the nations became numerous. In this same place was built
the most famous city, which took its name from the tower, and was called
Babylon. And when the confusion of tongues had taken place, then
increased the names of men and of other things, and this same Zoroaster
had many names; and although he understood that his pride was laid low
by the said building, still he worked his way unto worldly power, and
had himself chosen king over many peoples of the Assyrians. From him
arose the error of idolatry; and when he was worshiped he was called
Baal; we call him Bel; he also had many other names. But as the names
increased in number, so was truth lost; and from this first error every
following man worshiped his head-master, beasts or birds, the air and
the heavenly bodies, and various lifeless things, until the error at
length spread over the whole world; and so carefully did they lose the
truth that no one knew his maker, excepting those men alone who spoke
the Hebrew tongue,--that which flourished before the building of the
tower,--and still they did not lose the bodily endowments that were
given them, and therefore they judged of all things with earthly
understanding, for spiritual wisdom was not given unto them. They deemed
that all things were smithied of some one material.

3. The world was divided into three parts, one from the south, westward
to the Mediterranean Sea, which part was called Africa; but the southern
portion of this part is hot and scorched by the sun. The second part,
from the west and to the north and to the sea, is that called Europe, or
Enea. The northern portion of this is cold, so that grass grows not, nor
can anyone dwell there. From the north around the east region, and all
to the south, that is called Asia. In that part of the world is all
beauty and pomp, and wealth of the earth’s products, gold and precious
stones. There is also the mid-world, and as the earth there is fairer
and of a better quality than elsewhere, so are also the people there
most richly endowed with all gifts, with wisdom and strength, with
beauty and with all knowledge.

4. Near the middle of the world was built the house and inn, the most
famous that has been made, which was called Troy, in the land which we
call Turkey. This city was built much larger than others, with more
skill in many ways, at great expense, and with such means as were at
hand. There were twelve kingdoms and one over-king, and many lands and
nations belonged to each kingdom; there were in the city twelve chief
languages.[5] Their chiefs have surpassed all men who have been in the
world in all heroic things. No scholar who has ever told of these things
has ever disputed this fact, and for this reason, that all rulers of the
north region trace their ancestors back thither, and place in the number
of the gods all who were rulers of the city. Especially do they place
Priamos himself in the stead of Odin; nor must that be called wonderful,
for Priamos was sprung from Saturn, him whom the north region for a long
time believed to be God himself.

    [Footnote 5: Dasent translates “hövuðtungur” (chief or head
    tongues) with “lords,” which is certainly an error.]

5. This Saturn grew up in that island in Greece which hight Crete. He
was greater and stronger and fairer than other men. As in other natural
endowments, so he excelled all men in wisdom. He invented many crafts
which had not before been discovered. He was also so great in the art of
magic that he was certain about things that had not yet come to pass. He
found, too, that red thing in the earth from which he smelted gold, and
from such things he soon became very mighty. He also foretold harvests
and many other secret things, and for such, and many other deeds, he was
chosen chief of the island. And when he had ruled it a short time, then
there speedily enough became a great abundance of all things. No money
circulated excepting gold coins, so plentiful was this metal; and though
there was famine in other lands, the crops never failed in Crete, so
that people might seek there all the things which they needed to have.
And from this and many other secret gifts of power that he had, men
believed him to be God, and from him arose another error among the
Cretans and Macedonians like the one before mentioned among the
Assyrians and Chaldeans from Zoroaster. And when Saturn finds how great
strength the people think they have in him, he calls himself God, and
says that he rules heaven and earth and all things.

6. Once he went to Greece in a ship, for there was a king’s daughter on
whom he had set his heart. He won her love in this way, that one day
when she was out with her maid-servants, he took upon himself the
likeness of a bull, and lay before her in the wood, and so fair was he
that the hue of gold was on every hair; and when the king’s daughter saw
him she patted his lips. He sprang up and threw off the bull’s likeness
and took her into his arms and bore her to the ship and took her to
Crete. But his wife, Juno, found this out, so he turned her (the king’s
daughter) into the likeness of a heifer and sent her east to the arms of
the great river (that is, of the Nile, to the Nile country), and let the
thrall, who hight Argulos, take care of her. She was there twelve months
before he changed her shape again. Many things did he do like this,
or even more wonderful He had three sons: one hight Jupiter, another
Neptune, the third Pluto. They were all men of the greatest
accomplishments, and Jupiter was by far the greatest; he was a warrior
and won many kingdoms; he was also crafty like his father, and took upon
himself the likeness of many animals, and thus he accomplished many
things which are impossible for mankind; and on account of this, and
other things, he was held in awe by all nations. Therefore Jupiter is
put in the place of Thor, since all evil wights fear him.

7. Saturn had built in Crete seventy-two burgs, and when he thought
himself firmly established in his kingdom, he shared it with his sons,
whom he set up with himself as gods; and to Jupiter he gave the realm of
heaven; to Neptune, the realm of the earth, and to Pluto, hell; and this
last seemed to him the worst to manage, and therefore he gave to him his
dog, the one whom he called Cerberos, to guard hell. This Cerberos, the
Greeks say, Herakles dragged out of hell and upon earth. And although
Saturn had given the realm of heaven to Jupiter, the latter nevertheless
desired to possess the realm of the earth, and so he harried his
father’s kingdom, and it is said that he had him taken and emasculated,
and for such great achievements he declared himself to be god, and the
Macedonians say that he had the members taken and cast into the sea, and
therefore they believed for ages that therefrom had come a woman; her
they called Venus, and numbered among the gods, and she has in all ages
since been called goddess of love, for they believed she was able to
turn the hearts of all men and women to love. When Saturn was
emasculated by Jupiter, his son, he fled from the east out of Crete and
west into Italy. There dwelt at that time such people as did not work,
and lived on acorns and grass, and lay in caves or holes in the earth.
And when Saturn came there he changed his name and called himself Njord,
for the reason that he thought that Jupiter, his son, might afterward
seek him out. He was the first there to teach men to plow and plant
vineyards. There the soil was good and fresh, and it soon produced heavy
crops. He was made chief and thus he got possession of all the realms
there and built many burgs.

8. Jupiter, his son, had many sons, from whom races have descended; his
son was Dardanos, his son Herikon, his son Tros, his son Ilos, his son
Laomedon, the father of the chief king Priamos. Priamos had many sons;
one of them was Hektor, who was the most famous of all men in the world
for strength, and stature and accomplishments, and for all manly deeds
of a knightly kind; and it is found written that when the Greeks and all
the strength of the north and east regions fought with the Trojans, they
would never have become victors had not the Greeks invoked the gods; and
it is also stated that no human strength would conquer them unless they
were betrayed by their own men, which afterward was done. And from their
fame men that came after gave themselves titles, and especially was this
done by the Romans, who were the most famous in many things after their
days; and it is said that, when Rome was built, the Romans adapted their
customs and laws as nearly as possible to those of the Trojans, their
forefathers. And so much power accompanied these men for many ages
after, that when Pompey, a Roman chieftain, harried in the east region,
Odin fled out of Asia and hither to the north country, and then he gave
to himself and his men their names, and said that Priamos had hight Odin
and his queen Frigg, and from this the realm afterward took its name and
was called Frigia where the burg stood. And whether Odin said this of
himself out of pride, or that it was wrought by the changing of tongues;
nevertheless many wise men have regarded it a true saying, and for a
long time after every man who was a great chieftain followed his
example.

9. A king in Troy hight Munon or Mennon, his wife was a daughter of the
head-king Priamos and hight Troan; they had a son who hight Tror, him we
call Thor. He was fostered in Thrace by the duke, who is called Loricos.
But when he was ten winters old he took his father’s weapons. So fair of
face was he, when he stood by other men, as when ivory is set in oak;
his hair was fairer than gold. When he was twelve winters old he had
full strength; then he lifted from the ground ten bear skins all at
once, and then he slew Loricos, the duke, his foster-father and his
wife, Lora or Glora, and took possession of Thrace; this we call
Thrudheim. Then he visited many lands and knew the countries of the
world, and conquered single-handed all the berserks and all the giants,
and one very big dragon and many beasts. In the north region he found
that prophetess who hight Sibyl, whom we call Sif, and married her. None
can tell the genealogy of Sif; she was the fairest of all women, her
hair was like gold. Their son was Loride (Hloride), who was like his
father; his son was Henrede; his son Vingethor (Vingthor); his son
Vingener (Vingner); his son Moda (Mode); his son Magi (Magne); his son
Kesfet; his son Bedvig; his son Atra, whom we call Annan; his son
Itrman; his son Heremod (Hermod); his son Skjaldun, whom we call Skjold;
his son Bjaf, whom we call Bjar; his son Jat; his son Gudolf, his son
Fjarlaf, whom we call Fridleif; he had the son who is called Vodin, whom
we call Odin; he was a famous man for wisdom and all accomplishments.
His wife hight Frigida, whom we call Frigg.

10. Odin had the power of divination, and so had his wife, and from this
knowledge he found out that his name would be held high in the north
part of the world, and honored beyond that of all kings. For this reason
he was eager to begin his journey from Turkey, and he had with him very
many people, young and old, men and women, and he had with him many
costly things. But wherever they fared over the lands great fame was
spoken of them, and they were said to be more like gods than men. And
they stopped not on their journey before they came north into that land
which is now called Saxland; there Odin remained a long time, and
subjugated the country far and wide. There Odin established his three
sons as a defense of the land. One is named Veggdegg; he was a strong
king and ruled over East Saxland. His son was Vitrgils, and his sons
were Ritta, the father of Heingest (Hengist), and Sigar, the father of
Svebdegg, whom we call Svipdag. Another son of Odin hight Beldegg, whom
we call Balder; he possessed the land which now hight Vestfal; his son
was Brander, and his son Frjodigar, whom we call Froda (Frode). His son
was Freovit, his son Yvigg, his son Gevis, whom we call Gave. The third
son of Odin is named Sigge, his son Verer. These forefathers ruled the
land which is now called Frankland, and from them is come the race that
is called the Volsungs. From all of these many and great races are
descended.

11. Then Odin continued his journey northward and came into the country
which was called Reidgotaland, and in that land he conquered all that he
desired. He established there his son, who hight Skjold; his son hight
Fridleif; from him is descended the race which hight Skjoldungs; these
are the Dane kings, and that land hight now Jutland, which then was
called Reidgotaland.

12. Thereupon he fared north to what is now called Svithjod (Sweden),
there was the king who is called Gylfe. But when he heard of the coming
of those Asiamen, who were called asas, he went to meet them, and
offered Odin such things in his kingdom as he himself might desire. And
such good luck followed their path, that wherever they stopped in the
lands, there were bountiful crops and good peace; and all believed that
they were the cause thereof. The mighty men of the kingdom saw that they
were unlike other men whom they had seen, both in respect to beauty and
understanding. The land there seemed good to Odin, and he chose there
for himself a place for a burg, which is now called Sigtuna.[6] He there
established chiefs, like unto what had formerly existed in Troy; he
appointed twelve men in the burg to be judges of the law of the land,
and made all rights to correspond with what had before been in Troy, and
to what the Turks had been accustomed.

    [Footnote 6: Near Upsala.]

13. Thereupon he fared north until he reached the sea, which they
thought surrounded all lands, and there he established his son in the
kingdom, which is now called Norway; he is hight Saming, and the kings
of Norway count their ancestors back to him, and so do the jarls and
other mighty men, as it is stated in the Haleygjatal.[7] But Odin had
with him that son who is called Yngve, who was king in Sweden, and from
him is descended the families called Ynglings (Yngvelings). The asas
took to themselves wives there within the land. But some took wives for
their sons, and these families became so numerous that they spread over
Saxland, and thence over the whole north region, and the tongue of these
Asiamen became the native tongue of all these lands. And men think they
can understand from the way in which the names of their forefathers is
written, that these names have belonged to this tongue, and that the
asas have brought this tongue hither to the north, to Norway, to Sweden
and to Saxland. But in England are old names of places and towns which
can be seen to have been given in another tongue than this.

    [Footnote 7: A heroic poem, giving the pedigree (tal) of Norse
    kings.]




THE FOOLING OF GYLFE.

CHAPTER I.


GEFJUN’S PLOWING.

1. King Gylfe ruled the lands that are now called Svithjod (Sweden). Of
him it is said that he gave to a wayfaring woman, as a reward for the
entertainment she had afforded him by her story-telling, a plow-land in
his realm, as large as four oxen could plow it in a day and a night But
this woman was of the asa-race; her name was Gefjun. She took from the
north, from Jotunheim, four oxen, which were the sons of a giant and
her, and set them before the plow. Then went the plow so hard and deep
that it tore up the land, and the oxen drew it westward into the sea,
until it stood still in a sound. There Gefjun set the land, gave it a
name and called it Seeland. And where the land had been taken away
became afterward a sea, which in Sweden is now called Logrinn (the Lake,
the Malar Lake in Sweden). And in the Malar Lake the bays correspond to
the capes in Seeland. Thus Brage, the old skald:

  Gefjun glad
  Drew from Gylfe
  The excellent land,
  Denmark’s increase,
  So that it reeked
  From the running beasts.
  Four heads and eight eyes
  Bore the oxen
  As they went before the wide
  Robbed land of the grassy isle.[8]

    [Footnote 8: Heimskringla: Ynglinga Saga, ch. v.]




CHAPTER II.

GYLFE’S JOURNEY TO ASGARD.


2. King Gylfe was a wise man and skilled in the black art. He wondered
much that the asa-folk was so mighty in knowledge, that all things went
after their will. He thought to himself whether this could come from
their own nature, or whether the cause must be sought for among the gods
whom they worshiped. He therefore undertook a journey to Asgard. He went
secretly, having assumed the likeness of an old man, and striving thus
to disguise himself. But the asas were wiser, for they see into the
future, and, foreseeing his journey before he came, they received him
with an eye-deceit. So when he came into the burg he saw there a hall so
high that he could hardly look over it. Its roof was thatched with
golden shields as with shingles. Thus says Thjodolf of Hvin, that Valhal
was thatched with shields:

  Thinking thatchers
  Thatched the roof;
  The beams of the burg
  Beamed with gold.[9]

    [Footnote 9: Heimskringla: Harald Harfager’s Saga, ch. xix.]

In the door of the hall Gylfe saw a man who played with swords so
dexterously that seven were in the air at one time. That man asked him
what his name was. Gylfe answered that his name was Ganglere;[10] that
he had come a long way, and that he sought lodgings for the night. He
also asked who owned the burg. The other answered that it belonged to
their king: I will go with you to see him and then you may ask him for
his name yourself. Then the man turned and led the way into the hall.
Ganglere followed, and suddenly the doors closed behind him. There he
saw many rooms and a large number of people, of whom some were playing,
others were drinking, and some were fighting with weapons. He looked
around him, and much of what he saw seemed to him incredible. Then
quoth he:

  Gates all,
  Before in you go,
  You must examine well;
  For you cannot know
  Where enemies sit
  In the house before you.[11]

    [Footnote 10: The walker.]

    [Footnote 11: Elder Edda: Havamal.]

He saw three high-seats, one above the other, and in each sat a man. He
asked what the names of these chiefs were. He, who had conducted him in,
answered that the one who sat in the lowest high-seat was king, and
hight Har; the one next above him, Jafnhar; but the one who sat on the
highest throne, Thride. Har asked the comer what more his errand was,
and added that food and drink was there at his service, as for all in
Har’s hall. Ganglere answered that he first would like to ask whether
there was any wise man. Answered Har: You will not come out from here
hale unless you are wiser.

  And stand now forth
  While you ask;
  He who answers shall sit.




CHAPTER III.

OF THE HIGHEST GOD.


3. Ganglere then made the following question: Who is the highest and
oldest of all the gods? Made answer Har: Alfather he is called in our
tongue, but in Asgard of old he had twelve names. The first is Alfather,
the second is Herran or Herjan, the third Nikar or Hnikar, the fourth
Nikuz or Hnikud, the fifth Fjolner, the sixth Oske, the seventh Ome, the
eighth Biflide or Biflinde, the ninth Svidar, the tenth Svidrer, the
eleventh Vidrer, the twelfth Jalg or Jalk. Ganglere asks again: Where is
this god? What can he do? What mighty works has he accomplished?
Answered Har: He lives from everlasting to everlasting, rules over all
his realm, and governs all things, great and small. Then remarked
Jafnhar: He made heaven and earth, the air and all things in them.
Thride added: What is most important, he made man and gave him a spirit,
which shall live, and never perish, though the body may turn to dust or
burn to ashes. All who live a life of virtue shall dwell with him in
Gimle or Vingolf. The wicked, on the other hand, go to Hel, and from her
to Niflhel, that is, down into the ninth world. Then asked Ganglere:
What was he doing before heaven and earth were made? Har gave answer:
Then was he with the frost-giants.




CHAPTER IV.

THE CREATION OF THE WORLD.


4. Said Ganglere: How came the world into existence, or how did it rise?
What was before? Made answer to him Har: Thus is it said in the Vala’s
Prophecy:

  It was Time’s morning,
  When there nothing was;
  Nor sand, nor sea,
  Nor cooling billows.
  Earth there was not,
  Nor heaven above.
  The Ginungagap was,
  But grass nowhere.[12]

    [Footnote 12: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 6.]

Jafnhar remarked: Many ages before the earth was made, Niflheim had
existed, in the midst of which is the well called Hvergelmer, whence
flow the following streams: Svol, Gunnthro, Form, Fimbul, Thul, Slid and
Hrid, Sylg and Ylg, Vid, Leipt and Gjoll, the last of which is nearest
the gate of Hel. Then added Thride: Still there was before a world to
the south which hight Muspelheim. It is light and hot, and so bright
and dazzling that no stranger, who is not a native there, can stand it.
Surt is the name of him who stands on its border guarding it. He has a
flaming sword in his hand, and at the end of the world he will come and
harry, conquer all the gods, and burn up the whole world with fire. Thus
it is said in the Vala’s Prophecy:

  Surt from the south fares
  With blazing flames;
  From the sword shines
  The sun of the war-god.
  Rocks dash together
  And witches collapse,
  Men go the way to Hel
  And the heavens are cleft.[13]

    [Footnote 13: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 56.]

5. Said Ganglere: What took place before the races came into existence,
and men increased and multiplied? Replied Har, explaining, that as soon
as the streams, that are called the Elivogs, had come so far from their
source that the venomous yeast which flowed with them hardened, as does
dross that runs from the fire, then it turned into ice. And when this
ice stopped and flowed no more, then gathered over it the drizzling rain
that arose from the venom and froze into rime, and one layer of ice was
laid upon the other clear into Ginungagap. Then said Jafnhar: All that
part of Ginungagap that turns toward the north was filled with thick
and heavy ice and rime, and everywhere within were drizzling rains and
gusts. But the south part of Ginungagap was lighted up by the glowing
sparks that flew out of Muspelheim. Added Thride: As cold and all things
grim proceeded from Niflheim, so that which bordered on Muspelheim was
hot and bright, and Ginungagap was as warm and mild as windless air. And
when the heated blasts from Muspelheim met the rime, so that it melted
into drops, then, by the might of him who sent the heat, the drops
quickened into life and took the likeness of a man, who got the name
Ymer. But the Frost giants call him Aurgelmer. Thus it is said in the
short Prophecy of the Vala (the Lay of Hyndla):

  All the valas are
  From Vidolf descended;
  All wizards are
  Of Vilmeide’s race;
  All enchanters
  Are sons of Svarthofde;
  All giants have
  Come from Ymer.[14]

    [Footnote 14: Elder Edda: Hyndla’a Lay, 34.]

And on this point, when Vafthrudner, the giant, was asked by Gangrad:

  Whence came Aurgelmer
  Originally to the sons
  Of the giants?--thou wise giant![15]

he said

  From the Elivogs
  Sprang drops of venom,
  And grew till a giant was made.
  Thence our race
  Are all descended,
  Therefore are we all so fierce.[16]

    [Footnote 15: Elder Edda: Vafthrudner’s Lay, 30.]

    [Footnote 16: Elder Edda: Vafthrudner’s Lay, 31.]

Then asked Ganglere: How were the races developed from him? Or what was
done so that more men were made? Or do you believe him to be god of whom
you now spake? Made answer Har: By no means do we believe him to be god;
evil was he and all his offspring, them we call frost-giants. It is said
that when he slept he fell into a sweat, and then there grew under his
left arm a man and a woman, and one of his feet begat with the other a
son. From these come the races that are called frost-giants. The old
frost-giant we call Ymer.

6. Then said Ganglere: Where did Ymer dwell, and on what did he live?
Answered Har: The next thing was that when the rime melted into drops,
there was made thereof a cow, which hight Audhumbla. Four milk-streams
ran from her teats, and she fed Ymer. Thereupon asked Ganglere: On what
did the cow subsist? Answered Har: She licked the salt-stones that were
covered with rime, and the first day that she licked the stones there
came out of them in the evening a man’s hair, the second day a man’s
head, and the third day the whole man was there. This man’s name was
Bure; he was fair of face, great and mighty, and he begat a son whose
name was Bor. This Bor married a woman whose name was Bestla, the
daughter of the giant Bolthorn; they had three sons,--the one hight
Odin, the other Vile, and the third Ve. And it is my belief that this
Odin and his brothers are the rulers of heaven and earth. We think that
he must be so called. That is the name of the man whom we know to be the
greatest and most famous, and well may men call him by that name.

7. Ganglere asked: How could these keep peace with Ymer, or who was the
stronger? Then answered Har: The sons of Bor slew the giant Ymer, but
when he fell, there flowed so much blood from his wounds that they
drowned therein the whole race of frost giants; excepting one, who
escaped with his household. Him the giants call Bergelmer. He and his
wife went on board his ark and saved themselves in it. From them are
come new races of frost-giants, as is here said:

  Countless winters
  Ere the earth was made,
  Was born Bergelmer.
  This first I call to mind
  How that crafty giant
  Safe in his ark lay.[17]

    [Footnote 17: Elder Edda: Vafthrudner’s Lay, 35.]

8. Then said Ganglere: What was done then by the sons of Bor, since you
believe that they were gods? Answered Har: About that there is not a
little to be said. They took the body of Ymer, carried it into the midst
of Ginungagap and made of him the earth. Of his blood they made the seas
and lakes; of his flesh the earth was made, but of his bones the rocks;
of his teeth and jaws, and of the bones that were broken, they made
stones and pebbles. Jafnhar remarked: Of the blood that flowed from the
wounds, and was free, they made the ocean; they fastened the earth
together and around it they laid this ocean in a ring without, and it
must seem to most men impossible to cross it. Thride added: They took
his skull and made thereof the sky, and raised it over the earth with
four sides. Under each corner they set a dwarf, and the four dwarfs were
called Austre (east), Vestre (West), Nordre (North), Sudre (South). Then
they took glowing sparks, that were loose and had been cast out from
Muspelheim, and placed them in the midst of the boundless heaven, both
above and below, to light up heaven and earth. They gave resting-places
to all fires, and set some in heaven; some were made to go free under
heaven, but they gave them a place and shaped their course. In old songs
it is said that from that time days and years were reckoned. Thus in the
Prophecy of the Vala:

  The sun knew not
  Where her hall she had;
  The moon knew not
  What might he had;
  The stars knew not
  Their resting-places.[18]

    [Footnote 18: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 8. In Old Norse the
    sun is feminine, and the moon masculine. See below, sections 11
    and 12.]

Thus it was before these things were made. Then said Ganglere: Wonderful
tidings are these I now hear; a wondrous great building is this, and
deftly constructed. How was the earth fashioned? Made answer Har: The
earth is round, and without it round about lies the deep ocean, and
along the outer strand of that sea they gave lands for the giant races
to dwell in; and against the attack of restless giants they built a burg
within the sea and around the earth. For this purpose they used the
giant Ymer’s eyebrows, and they called the burg Midgard. They also took
his brains and cast them into the air, and made therefrom the clouds,
as is here said:

  Of Ymer’s flesh
  The earth was made,
  And of his sweat the seas;
  Rocks of his bones,
  Trees of his hair,
  And the sky of his skull;
  But of his eyebrows
  The blithe powers
  Made Midgard for the sons of men.
  Of his brains
  All the melancholy
  Clouds were made.[19]

    [Footnote 19: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 40, 41. Comp.
    Vafthrudner’s Lay, 21.]




CHAPTER V.

THE CREATION--(CONTINUED.)


9. Then said Ganglere: Much had been done, it seemed to me, when heaven
and earth were made, when sun and moon were set in their places, and
when days were marked out; but whence came the people who inhabit the
world? Har answered as follows: As Bor’s sons went along the sea-strand,
they found two trees. These trees they took up and made men of them. The
first gave them spirit and life; the second endowed them with reason and
power of motion; and the third gave them form, speech, hearing and
eyesight. They gave them clothes and names; the man they called Ask, and
the woman Embla. From them all mankind is descended, and a
dwelling-place was given them under Midgard. In the next place, the sons
of Bor made for themselves in the middle of the world a burg, which is
called Asgard, and which we call Troy. There dwelt the gods and their
race, and thence were wrought many tidings and adventures, both on earth
and in the sky. In Asgard is a place called Hlidskjalf, and when Odin
seated himself there in the high-seat, he saw over the whole world, and
what every man was doing, and he knew all things that he saw. His wife
hight Frigg, and she was the daughter of Fjorgvin, and from their
offspring are descended the race that we call asas, who inhabited Asgard
the old and the realms that lie about it, and all that race are known to
be gods. And for this reason Odin is called Alfather, that he is the
father of all gods and men, and of all things that were made by him and
by his might. Jord (earth) was his daughter and his wife; with her he
begat his first son, and that is Asa-Thor. To him was given force and
strength, whereby he conquers all things quick.

10. Norfe, or Narfe, hight a giant, who dwelt in Jotunheim. He had a
daughter by name Night. She was swarthy and dark like the race she
belonged to. She was first married to a man who hight Naglfare. Their
son was Aud. Afterward she was married to Annar. Jord hight their
daughter. Her last husband was Delling (Daybreak), who was of asa-race.
Their son was Day, who was light and fair after his father. Then took
Alfather Night and her son Day, gave them two horses and two cars, and
set them up in heaven to drive around the earth, each in twelve hours by
turns. Night rides first on the horse which is called Hrimfaxe, and
every morning he bedews the earth with the foam from his bit. The horse
on which Day rides is called Skinfaxe, and with his mane he lights up
all the sky and the earth.

11. Then said Ganglere: How does he steer the course of the sun and the
moon? Answered Har: Mundilfare hight the man who had two children. They
were so fair and beautiful that he called his son Moon, and his
daughter, whom he gave in marriage to a man by name Glener, he called
Sun. But the gods became wroth at this arrogance, took both the brother
and the sister, set them up in heaven, and made Sun drive the horses
that draw the car of the sun, which the gods had made to light up the
world from sparks that flew out of Muspelheim. These horses hight Arvak
and Alsvid. Under their withers the gods placed two wind-bags to cool
them, but in some songs it is called ironcold (ísarnkol). Moon guides
the course of the moon, and rules its waxing and waning. He took from
the earth two children, who hight Bil and Hjuke, as they were going from
the well called Byrger, and were carrying on their shoulders the bucket
called Sager and the pole Simul. Their father’s name is Vidfin. These
children always accompany Moon, as can be seen from the earth.

12. Then said Ganglere: Swift fares Sun, almost as if she were afraid,
and she could make no more haste in her course if she feared her
destroyer. Then answered Har: Nor is it wonderful that she speeds with
all her might. Near is he who pursues her, and there is no escape for
her but to run before him. Then asked Ganglere: Who causes her this
toil? Answered Har: It is two wolves. The one hight Skol, he runs after
her; she fears him and he will one day overtake her. The other hight
Hate, Hrodvitner’s son; he bounds before her and wants to catch the
moon, and so he will at last.[20] Then asked Ganglere: Whose offspring
are these wolves? Said Har; A hag dwells east of Midgard, in the forest
called Jarnved (Ironwood), where reside the witches called Jarnvidjes.
The old hag gives birth to many giant sons, and all in wolf’s likeness.
Thence come these two wolves. It is said that of this wolf-race one is
the mightiest, and is called Moongarm. He is filled with the life-blood
of all dead men. He will devour the moon, and stain the heavens and all
the sky with blood. Thereby the sun will be darkened, the winds will
grow wild, and roar hither and thither, as it is said in the Prophecy of
the Vala:

  In the east dwells the old hag,
  In the Jarnved forest;
  And brings forth there
  Fenrer’s offspring.
  There comes of them all
  One the worst,
  The moon’s devourer
  In a troll’s disguise.

  He is filled with the life-blood
  Of men doomed to die;
  The seats of the gods
  He stains with red gore;
  Sunshine grows black
  The summer thereafter,
  All weather gets fickle.
  Know you yet or not?[21]

    [Footnote 20: That wolves follow the sun and moon, is a
    wide-spread popular superstition. In Sweden, a parhelion is
    called Solvarg (sun-wolf).]

    [Footnote 21: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 43, 44.]

13. Then asked Ganglere: What is the path from earth to heaven? Har
answered, laughing: Foolishly do you now ask. Have you not been told
that the gods made a bridge from earth to heaven, which is called
Bifrost? You must have seen it. It may be that you call it the rainbow.
It has three colors, is very strong, and is made with more craft and
skill than other structures. Still, however strong it is, it will break
when the sons of Muspel come to ride over it, and then they will have to
swim their horses over great rivers in order to get on. Then said
Ganglere: The gods did not, it seems to me, build that bridge honestly,
if it shall be able to break to pieces, since they could have done so,
had they desired. Then made answer Har: The gods are worthy of no blame
for this structure. Bifrost is indeed a good bridge, but there is no
thing in the world that is able to stand when the sons of Muspel come to
the fight.




CHAPTER VI.

THE FIRST WORKS OF THE ASAS. THE GOLDEN AGE.


14. Then said Ganglere: What did Alfather do when Asgard had been built?
Said Har: In the beginning he appointed rulers in a place in the middle
of the burg which is called Idavold, who were to judge with him the
disputes of men and decide the affairs of the burg. Their first work was
to erect a court, where there were seats for all the twelve, and,
besides, a high-seat for Alfather. That is the best and largest house
ever built on earth, and is within and without like solid gold. This
place is called Gladsheim. Then they built another hall as a home for
the goddesses, which also is a very beautiful mansion, and is called
Vingolf. Thereupon they built a forge; made hammer, tongs, anvil, and
with these all other tools. Afterward they worked in iron, stone and
wood, and especially in that metal which is called gold. All their
household wares were of gold. That age was called the golden age, until
it was lost by the coming of those women from Jotunheim. Then the gods
set themselves in their high-seats and held counsel. They remembered how
the dwarfs had quickened in the mould of the earth like maggots in
flesh. The dwarfs had first been created and had quickened in Ymer’s
flesh, and were then maggots; but now, by the decision of the gods, they
got the understanding and likeness of men, but still had to dwell in the
earth and in rocks. Modsogner was one dwarf and Durin another. So it is
said in the Vala’s Prophecy:

  Then went all the gods,
  The all-holy gods,
  On their judgment seats,
  And thereon took counsel
  Who should the race
  Of dwarfs create
  From the bloody sea
  And from Blain’s bones.
  In the likeness of men
  Made they many
  Dwarfs in the earth,
  As Durin said.

And these, says the Vala, are the names of the dwarfs:

  Nye, Nide,
  Nordre, Sudre,
  Austre, Vestre,
  Althjof, Dvalin,
  Na, Nain,
  Niping, Dain,
  Bifur, Bafur,
  Bombor, Nore,
  Ore, Onar,
  Oin, Mjodvitner,
  Vig, Gandalf,
  Vindalf, Thorin,
  File, Kile,
  Fundin, Vale,
  Thro, Throin,
  Thek, Lit, Vit,
  Ny, Nyrad,
  Rek, Radsvid.

But the following are also dwarfs and dwell in the rocks, while the
above-named dwell in the mould:

  Draupner, Dolgthvare,
  Hor, Hugstare,
  Hledjolf, Gloin,
  Dore, Ore,
  Duf, Andvare,
  Hepte, File,
  Har, Siar.

But the following come from Svarin’s How to Aurvang on Joruvold, and
from them is sprung Lovar. Their names are:

  Skirfer, Virfir,
  Skafid, Ae,
  Alf, Inge,
  Eikinslgalde,
  Fal, Froste,
  Fid, Ginnar.[22]

    [Footnote 22: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 12, 14-16, 18, 19.]




CHAPTER VII.

ON THE WONDERFUL THINGS IN HEAVEN.


15. Then said Ganglere: Where is the chief or most holy place of the
gods? Har answered: That is by the ash Ygdrasil. There the gods meet in
council every day. Said Ganglere: What is said about this place?
Answered Jafnhar: This ash is the best and greatest of all trees; its
branches spread over all the world, and reach up above heaven. Three
roots sustain the tree and stand wide apart; one root is with the asas
and another with the frost-giants, where Ginungagap formerly was; the
third reaches into Niflheim; under it is Hvergelmer, where Nidhug gnaws
the root from below. But under the second root, which extends to the
frost-giants, is the well of Mimer, wherein knowledge and wisdom are
concealed. The owner of the well hight Mimer. He is full of wisdom, for
he drinks from the well with the Gjallar-horn. Alfather once came there
and asked for a drink from the well, but he did not get it before he
left one of his eyes as a pledge. So it is said in the Vala’s Prophecy:

  Well know I, Odin,
  Where you hid your eye:
  In the crystal-clear
  Well of Mimer.
  Mead drinks Mimer
  Every morning
  From Valfather’s pledge.
  Know you yet or not?[23]

    [Footnote 23: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 24.]

The third root of the ash is in heaven, and beneath it is the most
sacred fountain of Urd. Here the gods have their doomstead. The asas
ride hither every day over Bifrost, which is also called Asa-bridge. The
following are the names of the horses of the gods: Sleipner is the best
one; he belongs to Odin, and he has eight feet. The second is Glad, the
third Gyller, the fourth Gler, the fifth Skeidbrimer, the sixth
Silfertop, the seventh Siner, the eighth Gisl, the ninth Falhofner, the
tenth Gulltop, the eleventh Letfet. Balder’s horse was burned with him.
Thor goes on foot to the doomstead, and wades the following rivers:

  Kormt and Ormt
  And the two Kerlaugs;
  These shall Thor wade
  Every day
  When he goes to judge
  Near the Ygdrasil ash;
  For the Asa-bridge
  Burns all ablaze,--
  The holy waters roar.[24]

    [Footnote 24: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 29.]

Then asked Ganglere: Does fire burn over Bifrost? Har answered: The red
which you see in the rainbow is burning fire. The frost-giants and the
mountain-giants would go up to heaven if Bifrost were passable for all
who desired to go there. Many fair places there are in heaven, and they
are all protected by a divine defense. There stands a beautiful hall
near the fountain beneath the ash. Out of it come three maids, whose
names are Urd, Verdande and Skuld. These maids shape the lives of men,
and we call them norns. There are yet more norns, namely those who come
to every man when he is born, to shape his life, and these are known to
be of the race of gods; others, on the other hand, are of the race of
elves, and yet others are of the race of dwarfs. As is here said:

  Far asunder, I think,
  The norns are born,
  They are not of the same race.
  Some are of the asas,
  Some are of the elves,
  Some are daughters of Dvalin.[25]

    [Footnote 25: Elder Edda: Fafner’s Lay, 13.]

Then said Ganglere: If the norns rule the fortunes of men, then they
deal them out exceedingly unevenly. Some live a good life and are rich;
some get neither wealth nor praise. Some have a long, others a short
life. Har answered: Good norns and of good descent shape good lives, and
when some men are weighed down with misfortune, the evil norns are the
cause of it.

16. Then said Ganglere: What other remarkable things are there to be
said about the ash? Har answered: Much is to be said about it. On one of
the boughs of the ash sits an eagle, who knows many things. Between his
eyes sits a hawk that is called Vedfolner. A squirrel, by name Ratatosk,
springs up and down the tree, and carries words of envy between the
eagle and Nidhug. Four stags leap about in the branches of the ash and
bite the leaves.[26] Their names are: Dain, Dvalin, Duney and Durathro.
In Hvergelmer with Nidhug are more serpents than tongue can tell. As is
here said:

  The ash Ygdrasil
  Bears distress
  Greater than men know.
  Stags bite it above,
  At the side it rots,
  Nidhug gnaws it below.

    [Footnote 26: The Icelandic barr. See Vigfusson, _sub voce_.]

And so again it is said:

  More serpents lie
  ’Neath the Ygdrasil ash
  Than is thought of
  By every foolish ape.
  Goin and Moin
  (They are sons of Grafvitner),
  Grabak and Grafvollud,
  Ofner and Svafner
  Must for aye, methinks,
  Gnaw the roots of that tree.[27]

    [Footnote 27: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 35, 34.]

Again, it is said that the norns, that dwell in the fountain of Urd,
every day take water from the fountain and take the clay that lies
around the fountain and sprinkle therewith the ash, in order that its
branches may not wither or decay. This water is so holy that all things
that are put into the fountain become as white as the film of an
egg-shell As is here said:

  An ash I know
  Hight Ygdrasil;
  A high, holy tree
  With white clay sprinkled.
  Thence come the dews
  That fall in the dales.
  Green forever it stands
  Over Urd’s fountain.[28]

    [Footnote 28: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 22.]

The dew which falls on the earth from this tree men call honey-fall, and
it is the food of bees. Two birds are fed in Urd’s fountain; they are
called swans, and they are the parents of the race of swans.

17. Then said Ganglere: Great tidings you are able to tell of the
heavens. Are there other remarkable places than the one by Urd’s
fountain? Answered Har: There are many magnificent dwellings. One is
there called Alfheim. There dwell the folk that are called light-elves;
but the dark-elves dwell down in the earth, and they are unlike the
light-elves in appearance, but much more so in deeds. The light-elves
are fairer than the sun to look upon, but the dark-elves are blacker
than pitch. Another place is called Breidablik, and no place is fairer.
There is also a mansion called Glitner, of which the walls and pillars
and posts are of red gold, and the roof is of silver. Furthermore, there
is a dwelling, by name Himinbjorg, which stands at the end of heaven,
where the Bifrost-bridge is united with heaven. And there is a great
dwelling called Valaskjalf, which belongs to Odin. The gods made it and
thatched it with, sheer silver. In this hall is the high-seat, which is
called Hlidskjalf, and when Alfather sits in this seat, he sees over all
the world. In the southern end of the world is the palace, which is the
fairest of all, and brighter than the sun; its name is Gimle. It shall
stand when both heaven and earth shall have passed away. In this hall
the good and the righteous shall dwell through all ages. Thus says the
Prophecy of the Vala:

  A hall I know, standing
  Than the sun fairer,
  Than gold better,
  Gimle by name.
  There shall good
  People dwell,
  And forever
  Delights enjoy.[29]

Then said Ganglere: Who guards this palace when Surt’s fire burns up
heaven and earth? Har answered: It is said that to the south and above
this heaven is another heaven, which is called Andlang. But there is a
third, which is above these, and is called Vidblain, and in this heaven
we believe this mansion (Gimle) to be situated; but we deem that the
light-elves alone dwell in it now.

    [Footnote 29: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 70.]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE ASAS.


18. Then said Ganglere: Whence comes the wind? It is so strong that it
moves great seas, and fans fires to flame, and yet, strong as it is,
it cannot be seen. Therefore it is wonderfully made. Then answered Har:
That I can tell you well. At the northern end of heaven sits a giant,
who hight Hrasvelg. He is clad in eagles’ plumes, and when he spreads
his wings for flight, the winds arise from under them. Thus is it here
said:

  Hrasvelg hight he
  Who sits at the end of heaven,
  A giant in eagle’s disguise.
  From his wings, they say,
  The wind does come
  Over all mankind.[30]

    [Footnote 30: Elder Edda: Vafthrudner’s Lay, 37.]

19. Then said Ganglere: How comes it that summer is so hot, but the
winter so cold? Har answered: A wise man would not ask such a question,
for all are able to tell this; but if you alone have become so stupid
that you have not heard of it, then I would rather forgive you for
asking unwisely once than that you should go any longer in ignorance of
what you ought to know. Svasud is the name of him who is father of
summer, and he lives such a life of enjoyment, that everything that is
mild is from him called sweet (svasligt). But the father of winter has
two names, Vindlone and Vindsval. He is the son of Vasad, and all that
race are grim and of icy breath, and winter is like them.

20. Then asked Ganglere: Which are the asas, in whom men are bound to
believe? Har answered him: Twelve are the divine asas. Jafnhar said:
No less holy are the asynjes (goddesses), nor is their power less. Then
added Thride: Odin is the highest and oldest of the asas. He rules all
things, but the other gods, each according to his might, serve him as
children a father. Frigg is his wife, and she knows the fate of men,
although she tells not thereof, as it is related that Odin himself said
to Asa-Loke:

  Mad are you, Loke!
  And out of your senses;
  Why do you not stop?
  Fortunes all,
  Methinks, Frigg knows,
  Though she tells them not herself.[31]

    [Footnote 31: Elder Edda. Loke’s Quarrel, 29, 47.]

Odin is called Alfather, for he is the father of all the gods; he is
also called Valfather, for all who fall in fight are his chosen sons.
For them he prepares Valhal and Vingolf, where they are called einherjes
(heroes). He is also called Hangagod, Haptagod, Farmagod; and he gave
himself still more names when he came to King Geirrod:

  Grim is my name,
  And Ganglare,
  Herjan, Hjalmbore,
  Thek, Thride,
  Thud, Ud,
  Helblinde, Har,
  Sad, Svipal,
  Sangetal,
  Herteit, Hnikar,
  Bileyg, Baleyg,
  Bolverk, Fjolner,
  Grimner, Glapsvid, Fjolsvid,
  Sidhot, Sidskeg,
  Sigfather, Hnikud,
  Alfather, Atrid, Farmatyr,
  Oske, Ome,
  Jafnhar, Biflinde,
  Gondler, Harbard,
  Svidur, Svidrir,
  Jalk, Kjalar, Vidur,
  Thro, Yg, Thund,
  Vak, Skilfing,
  Vafud, Hroptatyr,
  Gaut, Veratyr.[32]

    [Footnote 32: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 46-50.]

Then said Ganglere: A very great number of names you have given him; and
this I know, forsooth, that he must be a very wise man who is able to
understand and decide what chances are the causes of all these names.
Har answered: Much knowledge is needed to explain it all rightly, but
still it is shortest to tell you that most of these names have been
given him for the reason that, as there are many tongues in the world,
so all peoples thought they ought to turn his name into their tongue, in
order that they might be able to worship him and pray to him each in its
own language. Other causes of these names must be sought in his
journeys, which are told of in old sagas; and you can lay no claim to
being called a wise man if you are not able to tell of these wonderful
adventures.

21. Then said Ganglere: What are the names of the other asas? What is
their occupation, and what works have they wrought? Har answered: Thor
is the foremost of them. He is called Asa-Thor, or Oku-Thor.[33] He is
the strongest of all gods and men, and rules over the realm which is
called Thrudvang. His hall is called Bilskirner. Therein are five
hundred and forty floors, and it is the largest house that men have
made. Thus it is said in Grimner’s Lay:

  Five hundred floors
  And forty more,
  Methinks, has bowed Bilskirner.
  Of houses all
  That I know roofed
  I know my son’s is the largest.[34]

    [Footnote 33: Oku is derived from the Finnish thunder-god, Ukko.]

    [Footnote 34: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 24.]

Thor has two goats, by name Tangnjost and Tangrisner, and a chariot,
wherein he drives. The goats draw the chariot; wherefore he is called
Oku-Thor.[35] He possesses three valuable treasures. One of them is the
hammer Mjolner, which the frost-giants and mountain-giants well know
when it is raised; and this is not to be wondered at, for with it he has
split many a skull of their fathers or friends. The second treasure he
possesses is Megingjarder (belt of strength); when he girds himself with
it his strength is doubled. His third treasure that is of so great value
is his iron gloves; these he cannot do without when he lays hold of the
hammer’s haft. No one is so wise that he can tell all his great works;
but I can tell you so many tidings of him that it will grow late before
all is told that I know.

    [Footnote 35: The author of the Younger Edda is here mistaken. See
    note on page 82 {Footnote 33}.]

22. Thereupon said Ganglere: I wish to ask tidings of more of the asas.
Har gave him answer: Odin’s second son is Balder, and of him good things
are to be told. He is the best, and all praise him. He is so fair of
face and so bright that rays of light issue from him; and there is a
plant so white that it is likened unto Balder’s brow, and it is the
whitest of all plants. From this you can judge of the beauty both of his
hair and of his body. He is the wisest, mildest and most eloquent of all
the asas; and such is his nature that none can alter the judgment he has
pronounced. He inhabits the place in heaven called Breidablik, and there
nothing unclean can enter. As is here said:

  Breidablik it is called,
  Where Balder has
  Built for himself a hall
  In the land
  Where I know is found
  The least of evil.[36]

    [Footnote 36: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 12.]

23. The third asa is he who is called Njord. He dwells in Noatun, which
is in heaven. He rules the course of the wind and checks the fury of the
sea and of fire. He is invoked by seafarers and by fishermen. He is so
rich and wealthy that he can give broad lands and abundance to those who
call on him for them. He was fostered in Vanaheim, but the vans[37] gave
him as a hostage to the gods, and received in his stead as an
asa-hostage the god whose name is Honer. He established peace between
the gods and vans. Njord took to wife Skade, a daughter of the giant
Thjasse. She wished to live where her father had dwelt, that is, on the
mountains in Thrymheim; Njord, on the other hand, preferred to be near
the sea. They therefore agreed to pass nine nights in Thrymheim and
three in Noatun. But when Njord came back from the mountains to Noatun
he sang this:

    [Footnote 37: Compare Vainamoinen, the son of Ukko, in the Finnish
    epic Kalevala.]

  Weary am I of the mountains,
  Not long was I there,
  Only nine nights.
  The howl of the wolves
  Methought sounded ill
  To the song of the swans.

Skade then sang this:

  Sleep I could not
  On my sea-strand couch,
  For the scream of the sea-fowl.
  _There_ wakes me,
  As he comes from the sea,
  Every morning the mew.

Then went Skade up on the mountain, and dwelt in Thrymheim. She often
goes on skees (snow-shoes), with her bow, and shoots wild beasts. She is
called skee-goddess or skee-dis. Thus it is said:

  Thrymheim it is called
  Where Thjasse dwelt,
  That mightiest giant.
  But now dwells Skade,
  Pure bride of the gods,
  In her father’s old homestead.[38]

    [Footnote 38: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 11.]

24. Njord, in Noatun, afterward begat two children: a son, by name Frey,
and a daughter, by name Freyja. They were fair of face, and mighty. Frey
is the most famous of the asas. He rules over rain and sunshine, and
over the fruits of the earth. It is good to call on him for harvests and
peace. He also sways the wealth of men. Freyja is the most famous of the
goddesses. She has in heaven a dwelling which is called Folkvang, and
when she rides to the battle, one half of the slain belong to her, and
the other half to Odin. As is here said:

  Folkvang it is called,
  And there rules Freyja.
  For the seats in the hall
  Half of the slain
  She chooses each day;
  The other half is Odin’s.[39]

    [Footnote 39: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 14.]

Her hall is Sesrynmer, and it is large and beautiful. When she goes
abroad, she drives in a car drawn by two cats. She lends a favorable ear
to men who call upon her, and it is from her name the title has come
that women of birth and wealth are called frur.[40] She is fond of love
ditties, and it is good to call on her in love affairs.

    [Footnote 40: Icel. _frú_ (Ger. _frau_; Dan. _frue_), pl. _frúr_,
    means a lady. It is used of the wives of men of rank or title.
    It is derived from Freyja.]

25. Then said Ganglere: Of great importance these asas seem to me to be,
and it is not wonderful that you have great power, since you have such
excellent knowledge of the gods, and know to which of them to address
your prayers on each occasion. But what other gods are there? Har
answered: There is yet an asa, whose name is Tyr. He is very daring and
stout-hearted. He sways victory in war, wherefore warriors should call
on him. There is a saw, that he who surpasses others in bravery, and
never yields, is Tyr-strong. He is also so wise, that it is said of
anyone who is specially intelligent, that he is Tyr-learned. A proof of
his daring is, that when the asas induced the wolf Fenrer to let himself
be bound with the chain Gleipner, he would not believe that they would
loose him again until Tyr put his hand in his mouth as a pledge. But
when the asas would not loose the Fenris-wolf, he bit Tyr’s hand off at
the place of the wolf’s joint (the wrist; Icel. _úlfliðr_[41]). From
that time Tyr is one-handed, and he is now called a peacemaker among
men.

    [Footnote 41: This etymology is, however, erroneous, for the word
    is derived from _oln_ or _öln_, and the true form of the word is
    _ölnliðr_ = the ell-joint (wrist); thus we have _ölnboge_--the
    elbow; _öln_ = _alin_ (Gr. ὠδίνη; Lat. _ulna_; cp. A.-S.
    _el-boga_; Eng. _elbow_) is the arm from the elbow to the end of
    the middle finger, hence an ell in long measure.]

26. Brage is the name of another of the asas. He is famous for his
wisdom, eloquence and flowing speech. He is a master-skald, and from him
song-craft is called brag (poetry), and such men or women as distinguish
themselves by their eloquence are called brag-men[42] and brag-women.
His wife is Idun. She keeps in a box those apples of which the gods eat
when they grow old, and then they become young again, and so it will be
until Ragnarok (the twilight of the gods). Then said Ganglere: Of great
importance to the gods it must be, it seems to me, that Idun preserves
these apples with care and honesty. Har answered, and laughed: They ran
a great risk on one occasion, whereof I might tell you more, but you
shall first hear the names of more asas.

    [Footnote 42: Compare the Anglo-Saxon _brego_ = princeps, chief.]

27. Heimdal is the name of one. He is also called the white-asa. He is
great and holy; born of nine maidens, all of whom were sisters. He hight
also Hallinskide and Gullintanne, for his teeth were of gold. His horse
hight Gulltop (Gold-top). He dwells in a place called Himinbjorg, near
Bifrost. He is the ward of the gods, and sits at the end of heaven,
guarding the bridge against the mountain-giants. He needs less sleep
than a bird; sees an hundred miles around him, and as well by night as
by day. He hears the grass grow and the wool on the backs of the sheep,
and of course all things that sound louder than these. He has a trumpet
called the Gjallarhorn, and when he blows it it can be heard in all the
worlds. The head is called Heimdal’s sword. Thus it is here said:

  Himinbjorg it is called,
  Where Heimdal rules
  Over his holy halls;
  There drinks the ward of the gods
  In his delightful dwelling
  Glad the good mead.[43]

    [Footnote 43: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 13.]

And again, in Heimdal’s Song, he says himself:

  Son I am of maidens nine,
  Born I am of sisters nine.

28. Hoder hight one of the asas, who is blind, but exceedingly strong;
and the gods would wish that this asa never needed to be named, for the
work of his hand will long be kept in memory both by gods and men.

29. Vidar is the name of the silent asa. He has a very thick shoe, and
he is the strongest next after Thor. From him the gods have much help in
all hard tasks.

30. Ale, or Vale, is the son of Odin and Rind. He is daring in combat,
and a good shot.

31. Uller is the name of one, who is a son of Sif, and a step-son of
Thor. He is so good an archer, and so fast on his skees, that no one can
contend with him. He is fair of face, and possesses every quality of a
warrior. Men should invoke him in single combat.

32. Forsete is a son of Balder and Nanna, Nep’s daughter. He has in
heaven the hall which hight Glitner. All who come to him with disputes
go away perfectly reconciled. No better tribunal is to be found among
gods and men. Thus it is here said:

  Glitner hight the hall,
  On gold pillars standing,
  And roofed with silver.
  There dwells Forsete
  Throughout all time,
  And settles all disputes.[44]

    [Footnote 44: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 15.]




CHAPTER IX.

LOKE AND HIS OFFSPRING.


33. There is yet one who is numbered among the asas, but whom some call
the backbiter of the asas. He is the originator of deceit, and the
disgrace of all gods and men. His name is Loke, or Lopt. His father is
the giant Farbaute, but his mother’s name is Laufey, or Nal. His
brothers are Byleist and Helblinde. Loke is fair and beautiful of face,
but evil in disposition, and very fickle-minded. He surpasses other men
in the craft called cunning, and cheats in all things. He has often
brought the asas into great trouble, and often helped them out again,
with his cunning contrivances. His wife hight Sygin, and their son,
Nare, or Narfe.

34. Loke had yet more children. A giantess in Jotunheim, hight
Angerboda. With her he begat three children. The first was the
Fenris-wolf; the second, Jormungand, that is, the Midgard-serpent, and
the third, Hel. When the gods knew that these three children were being
fostered in Jotunheim, and were aware of the prophecies that much woe
and misfortune would thence come to them, and considering that much evil
might be looked for from them on their mother’s side, and still more on
their father’s, Alfather sent some of the gods to take the children and
bring them to him. When they came to him he threw the serpent into the
deep sea which surrounds all lands. There waxed the serpent so that he
lies in the midst of the ocean, surrounds all the earth, and bites his
own tail. Hel he cast into Niflheim, and gave her power over nine
worlds,[45] that she should appoint abodes to them that are sent to her,
namely, those who die from sickness or old age. She has there a great
mansion, and the walls around it are of strange height, and the gates
are huge. Eljudner is the name of her hall. Her table hight famine; her
knife, starvation. Her man-servant’s name is Ganglate; her
maid-servant’s, Ganglot.[46] Her threshold is called stumbling-block;
her bed, care; the precious hangings of her bed, gleaming bale. One-half
of her is blue, and the other half is of the hue of flesh; hence she is
easily known. Her looks are very stern and grim.

    [Footnote 45: Possibly this ought to read the ninth world, which
    would correspond with what we read on page 72, and in the Vala’s
    Prophecy. See also notes. It may be a mistake of the transcriber.]

    [Footnote 46: Both these words mean sloth.]

35. The wolf was fostered by the asas at home, and Tyr was the only one
who had the courage to go to him and give him food. When the gods saw
how much he grew every day, and all prophecies declared that he was
predestined to become fatal to them, they resolved to make a very strong
fetter, which they called Lading. They brought it to the wolf, and bade
him try his strength on the fetter. The wolf, who did not think it would
be too strong for him, let them do therewith as they pleased. But as
soon as he spurned against it the fetter burst asunder, and he was free
from Lading. Then the asas made another fetter, by one-half stronger,
and this they called Drome. They wanted the wolf to try this also,
saying to him that he would become very famous for his strength, if so
strong a chain was not able to hold him. The wolf thought that this
fetter was indeed very strong, but also that his strength had increased
since he broke Lading. He also took into consideration that it was
necessary to expose one’s self to some danger if he desired to become
famous; so he let them put the fetter on him. When the asas said they
were ready, the wolf shook himself, spurned against and dashed the
fetter on the ground, so that the broken pieces flew a long distance.
Thus he broke loose out of Drome. Since then it has been held as a
proverb, “to get loose out of Lading” or “to dash out of Drome,”
whenever anything is extraordinarily hard. The asas now began to fear
that they would not get the wolf bound. So Alfather sent the youth, who
is called Skirner, and is Frey’s messenger, to some dwarfs in
Svartalfaheim, and had them make the fetter which is called Gleipner. It
was made of six things: of the footfall of cats, of the beard of woman,
of the roots of the mountain, of the sinews of the bear, of the breath
of the fish, and of the spittle of the birds. If you have not known this
before, you can easily find out that it is true and that there is no lie
about it, since you must have observed that a woman has no beard, that a
cat’s footfall cannot be heard, and that mountains have no roots; and I
know, forsooth, that what I have told you is perfectly true, although
there are some things that you do not understand. Then said Ganglere:
This I must surely understand to be true. I can see these things which
you have taken as proof. But how was the fetter smithied? Answered Har:
That I can well explain to you. It was smooth and soft as a silken
string. How strong and trusty it was you shall now hear. When the fetter
was brought to the asas, they thanked the messenger for doing his errand
so well. Then they went out into the lake called Amsvartner, to the holm
(rocky island) called Lyngve, and called the wolf to go with them. They
showed him the silken band and bade him break it, saying that it was
somewhat stronger than its thinness would lead one to suppose. Then they
handed it from one to the other and tried its strength with their hands,
but it did not break. Still they said the wolf would be able to snap it.
The wolf answered: It seems to me that I will get no fame though I break
asunder so slender a thread as this is. But if it is made with craft and
guile, then, little though it may look, that band will never come on my
feet. Then said the asas that he would easily be able to break a slim
silken band, since he had already burst large iron fetters asunder. But
even if you are unable to break this band, you have nothing to fear from
the gods, for we will immediately loose you again. The wolf answered: If
you get me bound so fast that I am not able to loose myself again, you
will skulk away, and it will be long before I get any help from you,
wherefore I am loth to let this band be laid on me; but in order that
you may not accuse me of cowardice, let some one of you lay his hand in
my mouth as a pledge that this is done without deceit. The one asa
looked at the other, and thought there now was a choice of two evils,
and no one would offer his hand, before Tyr held out his right hand and
laid it in the wolf’s mouth. But when the wolf now began to spurn
against it the band grew stiffer, and the more he strained the tighter
it got. They all laughed except Tyr; he lost his hand. When the asas saw
that the wolf was sufficiently well bound, they took the chain which was
fixed to the fetter, and which was called Gelgja, and drew it through a
large rock which is called Gjol, and fastened this rock deep down in the
earth. Then they took a large stone, which is called Tvite, and drove it
still deeper into the ground, and used this stone for a fastening-pin.
The wolf opened his mouth terribly wide, raged and twisted himself with
all his might, and wanted to bite them; but they put a sword in his
mouth, in such a manner that the hilt stood in his lower jaw and the
point in the upper, that is his gag. He howls terribly, and the saliva
which runs from his mouth forms a river called Von. There he will lie
until Ragnarok. Then said Ganglere: Very bad are these children of Loke,
but they are strong and mighty. But why did not the asas kill the wolf
when they have evil to expect from him? Har answered: So great respect
have the gods for their holiness and peace-stead, that they would not
stain them with the blood of the wolf, though prophecies foretell that
he must become the bane of Odin.




CHAPTER X.

THE GODDESSES (ASYNJES).


36. Ganglere asked: Which are the goddesses? Har answered: Frigg is the
first; she possesses the right lordly dwelling which is called Fensaler.
The second is Saga, who dwells in Sokvabek, and this is a large
dwelling. The third is Eir, who is the best leech. The fourth is Gefjun,
who is a may, and those who die maids become her hand-maidens. The fifth
is Fulla, who is also a may, she wears her hair flowing and has a golden
ribbon about her head; she carries Frigg’s chest, takes care of her
shoes and knows her secrets. The sixth is Freyja, who is ranked with
Frigg. She is wedded to the man whose name is Oder; their daughter’s
name is Hnos, and she is so fair that all things fair and precious are
called, from her name, Hnos. Oder went far away. Freyja weeps for him,
but her tears are red gold. Freyja has many names, and the reason
therefor is that she changed her name among the various nations to which
she came in search of Oder. She is called Mardol, Horn, Gefn, and Syr.
She has the necklace Brising, and she is called Vanadis. The seventh is
Sjofn, who is fond of turning men’s and women’s hearts to love, and it
is from her name that love is called Sjafne. The eighth is Lofn, who is
kind and good to those who call upon her, and she has permission from
Alfather or Frigg to bring together men and women, no matter what
difficulties may stand in the way; therefore “love” is so called from
her name, and also that which is much loved by men. The ninth is Var.
She hears the oaths and troths that men and women plight to each other.
Hence such vows are called vars, and she takes vengeance on those who
break their promises. The tenth is Vor, who is so wise and searching
that nothing can be concealed from her. It is a saying that a woman
becomes vor (ware) of what she becomes wise. The eleventh is Syn, who
guards the door of the hall, and closes it against those who are not to
enter. In trials she guards those suits in which anyone tries to make
use of falsehood. Hence is the saying that “syn is set against it,” when
anyone tries to deny ought. The twelfth is Hlin, who guards those men
whom Frigg wants to protect from any danger. Hence is the saying that he
hlins who is forewarned. The thirteenth is Snotra, who is wise and
courtly. After her, men and women who are wise are called Snotras. The
fourteenth is Gna, whom Frigg sends on her errands into various worlds.
She rides upon a horse called Hofvarpner, that runs through the air and
over the sea. Once, when she was riding, some vans saw her faring
through the air. Then said one of them:

  What flies there?
  What fares there?
  What glides in the air?

She answered

  I fly not,
  Though I fare
  And glide through the air
  On Hofvarpner,
  That Hamskerper,
  Begat with Gardrofa.[47]

From Gna’s name it is said that anything that fares high in the air
gnas. Sol and Bil are numbered among the goddesses, but their nature has
already been described.[48]

    [Footnote 47: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 36]

    [Footnote 48: See page 66.]

37. There are still others who are to serve in Valhal, bear the drink
around, wait upon the table and pass the ale-horns. Thus they are named
in Grimner’s Lay:

  Hrist and Mist
  I want my horn to bring to me;
  Skeggold and Skogul,
  Hild and Thrud,
  Hlok and Heifjoter,
  Gol and Geirahod,
  Randgrid and Radgrid,
  And Reginleif;
  These bear ale to the einherjes.[49]

    [Footnote 49: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 36.]

These are called valkyries. Odin sends them to all battles, where they
choose those who are to be slain, and rule over the victory. Gud and
Rosta, and the youngest norn, Skuld, always ride to sway the battle and
choose the slain. Jord, the mother of Thor, and Rind, Vale’s mother, are
numbered among the goddesses.




CHAPTER XI.

THE GIANTESS GERD AND SKIRNER’S JOURNEY.[50]

38. Gymer hight a man whose wife was Orboda, of the race of the mountain
giants. Their daughter was Gerd, the fairest of all women. One day when
Frey had gone into Hlidskjalf, and was looking out upon all the worlds,
he saw toward the north a hamlet wherein was a large and beautiful
house. To this house went a woman, and when she raised her hands to open
the door, both the sky and the sea glistened therefrom, and she made all
the world bright. As a punishment for his audacity in seating himself in
that holy seat, Frey went away full of grief. When he came home, he
neither spake, slept, nor drank, and no one dared speak to him. Then
Njord sent for Skirner, Frey’s servant, bade him go to Frey and ask him
with whom he was so angry, since he would speak to nobody. Skirner said
that he would go, though he was loth to do so, as it was probable that
he would get evil words in reply. When he came to Frey and asked him why
he was so sad that he would not talk, Frey answered that he had seen a
beautiful woman, and for her sake he had become so filled with grief,
that he could not live any longer if he could not get her. And now you
must go, he added, and ask her hand for me and bring her home to me,
whether it be with or without the consent of her father. I will reward
you well for your trouble. Skirner answered saying that he would go on
this errand, but Frey must give him his sword, that was so excellent
that it wielded itself in fight. Frey made no objection to this and gave
him the sword. Skirner went on his journey, courted Gerd for him, and
got the promise of her that she nine nights thereafter should come to
Bar-Isle and there have her wedding with Frey. When Skirner came back
and gave an account of his journey, Frey said:

  Long is one night,
  Long are two nights,
  How can I hold out three?
  Oft to me one month
  Seemed less
  Than this half night of love.[51]

    [Footnote 50: This is the Niblung story in a nut-shell.]

    [Footnote 51: Elder Edda: Skirner’s Journey, 42.]

This is the reason why Frey was unarmed when he fought with Bele, and
slew him with a hart’s horn. Then said Ganglere: It is a great wonder
that such a lord as Frey would give away his sword, when he did not have
another as good. A great loss it was to him when he fought with Bele;
and this I know, forsooth, that he must have repented of that gift. Har
answered: Of no great account was his meeting with Bele. Frey could have
slain him with his hand. But the time will come when he will find
himself in a worse plight for not having his sword, and that will be
when the sons of Muspel sally forth to the fight.




CHAPTER XII.

LIFE IN VALHAL.


39. Then said Ganglere: You say that all men who since the beginning of
the world have fallen in battle have come to Odin in Valhal. What does
he have to give them to eat? It seems to me there must be a great throng
of people. Har answered: It is true, as you remark, that there is a
great throng; many more are yet to come there, and still they will be
thought too few when the wolf[52] comes. But however great may be the
throng in Valhal, they will get plenty of flesh of the boar Sahrimner.
He is boiled every day and is whole again in the evening. But as to the
question you just asked, it seems to me there are but few men so wise
that they are able to answer it correctly. The cook’s name is
Andhrimner, and the kettle is called Eldhrimner as is here said:

  Andhrimner cooks
  In Eldhrimner
  Sahrimner.
  ’Tis the best of flesh.
  There are few who know
  What the einherjes eat.[53]

    [Footnote 52: The Fenris-wolf in Ragnarok.]

    [Footnote 53: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 18.]

Ganglere asked: Does Odin have the same kind of food as the einherjes?
Har answered: The food that is placed on his table he gives to his two
wolves, which hight Gere and Freke. He needs no food himself. Wine is to
him both food and drink, as is here said:

  Gere and Freke
  Sates the warfaring,
  Famous father of hosts;
  But on wine alone
  Odin in arms renowned
  Forever lives.[54]

    [Footnote 54: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 19.]

Two ravens sit on Odin’s shoulders, and bring to his ears all that they
hear and see. Their names are Hugin and Munin. At dawn he sends them out
to fly over the whole world, and they come back at breakfast time. Thus
he gets information about many things, and hence he is called Rafnagud
(raven-god). As is here said:

  Hugin and Munin
  Fly every day
  Over the great earth.
  I fear for Hugin
  That he may not return,
  Yet more am I anxious for Munin.[55]

    [Footnote 55: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 20.]

40. Then asked Ganglere: What do the einherjes have to drink that is
furnished them as bountifully as the food? Or do they drink water? Har
answered: That is a wonderful question. Do you suppose that Alfather
invites kings, jarls, or other great men, and gives them water to drink?
This I know, forsooth, that many a one comes to Valhal who would think
he was paying a big price for his water-drink, if there were no better
reception to be found there,--persons, namely, who have died from wounds
and pain. But I can tell you other tidings. A she-goat, by name Heidrun,
stands up in Valhal and bites the leaves off the branches of that famous
tree called Lerad. From her teats runs so much mead that she fills every
day a vessel in the hall from which the horns are filled, and which is
so large that all the einherjes get all the drink they want out of it.
Then said Ganglere: That is a most useful goat, and a right excellent
tree that must be that she feeds upon. Then said Har: Still more
remarkable is the hart Eikthyrner, which stands over Valhal and bites
the branches of the same tree. From his horns fall so many drops down
into Hvergelmer, that thence flow the rivers that are called Sid, Vid,
Sekin, Ekin, Svol, Gunthro, Fjorm, Fimbulthul, Gipul, Gopul, Gomul and
Geirvimul, all of which fall about the abodes of the asas. The following
are also named: Thyn, Vin, Thol, Bol, Grad, Gunthrain, Nyt, Not, Non,
Hron, Vina, Vegsvin, Thjodnuma.

41. Then said Ganglere: That was a wonderful tiding that you now told
me. A mighty house must Valhal be, and a great crowd there must often be
at the door. Then answered Har: Why do you not ask how many doors there
are in Valhal, and how large they are? When you find that out, you will
confess that it would rather be wonderful if everybody could not easily
go in and out. It is also a fact that it is no more difficult to find
room within than to get in. Of this you may hear what the Lay of Grimner
says:

  Five hundred doors
  And forty more,
  I trow, there are in Valhal.
  Eight hundred einherjes
  Go at a time through one door
  When they fare to fight with the wolf.[56]

    [Footnote 56: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 23.]

42. Then said Ganglere: A mighty band of men there is in Valhal, and,
forsooth, I know that Odin is a very great chief, since he commands so
mighty a host. But what is the pastime of the einherjes when they do not
drink? Har answered: Every morning, when they have dressed themselves,
they take their weapons and go out into the court and fight and slay
each other. That is their play. Toward breakfast-time they ride home to
Valhal and sit down to drink. As is here said:

  All the einherjes
  In Odin’s court
  Hew daily each other.
  They choose the slain
  And ride from the battle-field,
  Then sit they in peace together.[57]

But true it is, as you said, that Odin is a great chief. There are many
proofs of that. Thus it is said in the very words of the asas
themselves:

  The Ygdrasil ash
  Is the foremost of trees,
  But Skidbladner of ships,
  Odin of asas,
  Sleipner of steeds,
  Bifrost of bridges,
  Brage of Skalds,
  Habrok of hows,
  But Garm of dogs.[58]

    [Footnote 57: Elder Edda: Vafthrudner’s Lay, 41.]

    [Footnote 58: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 44.]




CHAPTER XIII.

ODIN’S HORSE AND FREY’S SHIP.


43. Ganglere asked: Whose is that horse Sleipner, and what is there to
say about it? Har answered: You have no knowledge of Sleipner, nor do
you know the circumstances attending his birth; but it must seem to you
worth the telling. In the beginning, when the town of the gods was
building, when the gods had established Midgard and made Valhal, there
came a certain builder and offered to make them a burg, in three half
years, so excellent that it should be perfectly safe against the
mountain-giants and frost-giants, even though they should get within
Midgard. But he demanded as his reward, that he should have Freyja, and
he wanted the sun and moon besides. Then the asas came together and held
counsel, and the bargain was made with the builder that he should get
what he demanded if he could get the burg done in one winter; but if on
the first day of summer any part of the burg was unfinished, then the
contract should be void. It was also agreed that no man should help him
with the work. When they told him these terms, he requested that they
should allow him to have the help of his horse, called Svadilfare, and
at the suggestion of Loke this was granted him.

On the first day of winter he began to build the burg, but by night he
hauled stone for it with his horse. But it seemed a great wonder to the
asas what great rocks that horse drew, and the horse did one half more
of the mighty task than the builder. The bargain was firmly established
with witnesses and oaths, for the giant did not deem it safe to be among
the asas without truce if Thor should come home, who now was on a
journey to the east fighting trolls. Toward the end of winter the burg
was far built, and it was so high and strong that it could in nowise be
taken. When there were three days left before summer, the work was all
completed excepting the burg gate. Then went the gods to their
judgment-seats and held counsel, and asked each other who could have
advised to give Freyja in marriage in Jotunheim, or to plunge the air
and the heavens in darkness by taking away the sun and the moon and
giving them to the giant; and all agreed that this must have been
advised by him who gives the most bad counsels, namely, Loke, son of
Laufey, and they threatened him with a cruel death if he could not
contrive some way of preventing the builder from fulfilling his part of
the bargain, and they proceeded to lay hands on Loke. He in his fright
then promised with an oath that he should so manage that the builder
should lose his wages, let it cost him what it would. And the same
evening, when the builder drove out after stone with his horse
Svadilfare, a mare suddenly ran out of the woods to the horse and began
to neigh at him. The steed, knowing what sort of horse this was, grew
excited, burst the reins asunder and ran after the mare, but she ran
from him into the woods. The builder hurried after them with all his
might, and wanted to catch the steed, but these horses kept running all
night, and thus the time was lost, and at dawn the work had not made the
usual progress. When the builder saw that his work was not going to be
completed, he resumed his giant form. When the asas thus became sure
that it was really a mountain-giant that had come among them, they did
not heed their oaths, but called on Thor. He came straightway, swung his
hammer, Mjolner, and paid the workman his wages,--not with the sun and
moon, but rather by preventing him from dwelling in Jotunheim; and this
was easily done with the first blow of the hammer, which broke his skull
into small pieces and sent him down to Niflhel. But Loke had run such a
race with Svadilfare that he some time after bore a foal. It was gray,
and had eight feet, and this is the best horse among gods and men. Thus
it is said in the Vala’s Prophecy:

  Then went the gods.
  The most holy gods,
  Onto their judgment-seats,
  And counseled together
  Who all the air
  With guile had blended
  Or to the giant race
  Oder’s may had given.
  Broken were oaths,
  And words and promises,--
  All mighty speech
  That had passed between them.
  Thor alone did this,
  Swollen with anger.
  Seldom sits he still
  When such things he hears.[59]

44. Then asked Ganglere: What is there to be said of Skidbladner, which
you say is the best of ships? Is there no ship equally good, or equally
great? Made answer Har: Skidbladner is the best of ships, and is made
with the finest workmanship; but Naglfare, which is in Muspel, is the
largest. Some dwarfs, the sons of Ivalde, made Skidbladner and gave it
to Frey. It is so large that all the asas, with their weapons and
war-gear, can find room on board it, and as soon as the sails are
hoisted it has fair wind, no matter whither it is going. When it is not
wanted for a voyage, it is made of so many pieces and with so much
skill, that Frey can fold it together like a napkin and carry it in his
pocket.

    [Footnote 59: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 29, 30.]




CHAPTER XIV.

THOR’S ADVENTURES.


Then said Ganglere: A good ship is Skidbladner, but much black art must
have been resorted to ere it was so fashioned. Has Thor never come where
he has found anything so strong and mighty that it has been superior to
him either in strength or in the black art? Har answered: Few men, I
know, are able to tell thereof, but still he has often been in difficult
straits. But though there have been things so mighty and strong that
Thor has not been able to gain the victory, they are such as ought not
to be spoken of; for there are many proofs which all must accept that
Thor is the mightiest. Then said Ganglere: It seems to me that I have
now asked about something that no one can answer. Said Jafnhar: We have
heard tell of adventures that seem to us incredible, but here sits one
near who is able to tell true tidings thereof, and you may believe that
he will not lie for the first time now, who never told a lie before.
Then said Ganglere: I will stand here and listen, to see if any answer
is to be had to this question. But if you cannot answer my question I
declare you to be defeated. Then answered Thride: It is evident that he
now is bound to know, though it does not seem proper for us to speak
thereof. The beginning of this adventure is that Oku-Thor went on a
journey with his goats and chariot, and with him went the asa who is
called Loke. In the evening they came to a bonde[60] and got there
lodgings for the night. In the evening Thor took his goats and killed
them both, whereupon he had them flayed and borne into a kettle. When
the flesh was boiled, Thor and his companion sat down to supper. Thor
invited the bonde, his wife and their children, a son by name Thjalfe,
and a daughter by name Roskva, to eat with them. Then Thor laid the
goat-skins away from the fire-place, and requested the bonde and his
household to cast the bones onto the skins. Thjalfe, the bonde’s son,
had the thigh of one of the goats, which he broke asunder with his
knife, in order to get at the marrow, Thor remained there over night. In
the morning, just before daybreak, he arose, dressed himself, took the
hammer Mjolner, lifted it and hallowed the goat-skins. Then the goats
arose, but one of them limped on one of its hind legs. When Thor saw
this he said that either the bonde or one of his folk had not dealt
skillfully with the goat’s bones, for he noticed that the thigh was
broken. It is not necessary to dwell on this part of the story. All can
understand how frightened the bonde became when he saw that Thor let his
brows sink down over his eyes. When he saw his eyes he thought he must
fall down at the sight of them alone. Thor took hold of the handle of
his hammer so hard that his knuckles grew white. As might be expected,
the bonde and all his household cried aloud and sued for peace, offering
him as an atonement all that they possessed. When he saw their fear, his
wrath left him. He was appeased, and took as a ransom the bonders
children, Thjalfe and Roskva. They became his servants, and have always
accompanied him since that time.

    [Footnote 60: Bonde = peasant.]

46. He left his goats there and went on his way east into Jotunheim,
clear to the sea, and then he went on across the deep ocean, and went
ashore on the other side, together with Loke and Thjalfe and Roskva.
When they had proceeded a short distance, there stood before them a
great wood, through which they kept going the whole day until dark.
Thjalfe, who was of all men the fleetest of foot, bore Thor’s bag, but
the wood was no good place for provisions. When it had become dark, they
sought a place for their night lodging, and found a very large hall. At
the end of it was a door as wide as the hall. Here they remained through
the night. About midnight there was a great earthquake; the ground
trembled beneath them, and the house shook. Then Thor stood up and
called his companions. They looked about them and found an adjoining
room to the right, in the midst of the hall, and there they went in.
Thor seated himself in the door; the others went farther in and were
very much frightened. Thor held his hammer by the handle, ready to
defend himself. Then they heard a great groaning and roaring. When it
began to dawn, Thor went out and saw a man lying not far from him in the
wood. He was very large, lay sleeping, and snored loudly. Then Thor
thought he had found out what noise it was that they had heard in the
night. He girded himself with his Megingjarder, whereby his asa-might
increased. Meanwhile the man woke, and immediately arose. It is said
that Thor this once forbore to strike him with the hammer, and asked him
for his name. He called himself Skrymer; but, said he, I do not need to
ask you what your name is,--I know that you are Asa-Thor. But what have
you done with my glove? He stretched out his hand and picked up his
glove. Then Thor saw that the glove was the hall in which he had spent
the night, and that the adjoining room was the thumb of the glove.
Skrymer asked whether they would accept of his company. Thor said yes.
Skrymer took and loosed his provision-sack and began to eat his
breakfast; but Thor and his fellows did the same in another place.
Skrymer proposed that they should lay their store of provisions
together, to which Thor consented. Then Skrymer bound all their
provisions into one bag, laid it on his back, and led the way all the
day, taking gigantic strides. Late in the evening he sought out a place
for their night quarters under a large oak. Then Skrymer said to Thor
that he wanted to lie down to sleep; they might take the provision-sack
and make ready their supper. Then Skrymer fell asleep and snored
tremendously. When Thor took the provision-sack and was to open it, then
happened what seems incredible, but still it must be told,--that he
could not get one knot loosened, nor could he stir a single end of the
strings so that it was looser than before. When he saw that all his
efforts were in vain he became wroth, seized his hammer Mjolner with
both his hands, stepped with one foot forward to where Skrymer was lying
and dashed the hammer at his head. Skrymer awoke and asked whether some
leaf had fallen upon his head; whether they had taken their supper, and
were ready to go to sleep. Thor answered that they were just going to
sleep. Then they went under another oak. But the truth must be told,
that there was no fearless sleeping. About midnight Thor heard that
Skrymer was snoring and sleeping so fast that it thundered in the wood.
He arose and went over to him, clutched the hammer tight and hard, and
gave him a blow in the middle of the crown, so that he knew that the
head of the hammer sank deep into his head. But just then Skrymer awoke
and asked: What is that? Did an acorn fall onto my head? How is it with
you, Thor? Thor hastened back, answered that he had just waked up, and
said that it was midnight and still time to sleep. Then Thor made up his
mind that if he could get a chance to give him the third blow, he should
never see him again, and he now lay watching for Skrymer to sleep fast.
Shortly before daybreak he heard that Skrymer had fallen asleep. So he
arose and ran over to him. He clutched the hammer with all his might and
dashed it at his temples, which he saw uppermost. The hammer sank up to
the handle. Skrymer sat up, stroked his temples, and said: Are there any
birds sitting in the tree above me? Methought, as I awoke, that some
moss from the branches fell on my head. What! are you awake, Thor? It is
now time to get up and dress; but you have not far left to the burg that
is called Utgard. I have heard that you have been whispering among
yourselves that I am not small of stature, but you will see greater men
when you come to Utgard. Now I will give you wholesome advice. Do not
brag too much of yourselves, for Utgard-Loke’s thanes will not brook the
boasting of such insignificant little fellows as you are; otherwise turn
back, and that is, in fact, the best thing for you to do. But if you are
bound to continue your journey, then keep straight on eastward; my way
lies to the north, to those mountains that you there see. Skrymer then
took the provision-sack and threw it on his back, and, leaving them,
turned into the wood, and it has not been learned whether the asas
wished to meet him again in health.

47. Thor and his companions went their way and continued their journey
until noon. Then they saw a burg standing on a plain, and it was so high
that they had to bend their necks clear back before they could look over
it. They drew nearer and came to the burg-gate, which was closed. Thor
finding himself unable to open it, and being anxious to get within the
burg, they crept between the bars and so came in. They discovered a
large hall and went to it. Finding the door open they entered, and saw
there many men, the most of whom were immensely large, sitting on two
benches. Thereupon they approached the king, Utgard-Loke, and greeted
him. He scarcely deigned to look at them, smiled scornfully and showed
his teeth, saying: It is late to ask for tidings of a long journey, but
if I am not mistaken this stripling is Oku-Thor, is it not? It may be,
however, that you are really bigger than you look For what feats are you
and your companions prepared? No one can stay with us here, unless he is
skilled in some craft or accomplishment beyond the most of men. Then
answered he who came in last, namely Loke: I know the feat of which I am
prepared to give proof, that there is no one present who can eat his
food faster than I. Then said Utgard-Loke: That is a feat, indeed,
if you can keep your word, and you shall try it immediately. He then
summoned from the bench a man by name Loge, and requested him to come
out on the floor and try his strength against Loke. They took a trough
full of meat and set it on the floor, whereupon Loke seated himself at
one end and Loge at the other. Both ate as fast as they could, and met
at the middle of the trough. Loke had eaten all the flesh off from the
bones, but Loge had consumed both the flesh and the bones, and the
trough too. All agreed that Loke had lost the wager. Then Utgard-Loke
asked what game that young man knew? Thjalfe answered that he would try
to run a race with anyone that Utgard-Loke might designate. Utgard-Loke
said this was a good feat, and added that it was to be hoped that he
excelled in swiftness if he expected to win in this game, but he would
soon have the matter decided. He arose and went out. There was an
excellent race-course along the flat plain. Utgard-Loke then summoned a
young man, whose name was Huge, and bade him run a race with Thjalfe.
Then they took the first heat, and Huge was so much ahead that when he
turned at the goal he met Thjalfe. Said Utgard-Loke: You must lay
yourself more forward, Thjalfe, if you want to win the race; but this I
confess, that there has never before come anyone hither who was swifter
of foot than you. Then they took a second heat, and when Huge came to
the goal and turned, there was a long bolt-shot to Thjalfe. Then said
Utgard-Loke: Thjalfe seems to me to run well; still I scarcely think he
will win the race, but this will be proven when they run the third heat.
Then they took one more heat. Huge ran to the goal and turned back, but
Thjalfe had not yet gotten to the middle of the course. Then all said
that this game had been tried sufficiently. Utgard-Loke now asked Thor
what feats there were that he would be willing to exhibit before them,
corresponding to the tales that men tell of his great works. Thor
replied that he preferred to compete with someone in drinking.
Utgard-Loke said there would be no objection to this. He went into the
hall, called his cup-bearer, and requested him to take the sconce-horn
that his thanes were wont to drink from. The cup-bearer immediately
brought forward the horn and handed it to Thor. Said Utgard-Loke: From
this horn it is thought to be well drunk if it is emptied in one
draught, some men empty it in two draughts, but there is no drinker so
wretched that he cannot exhaust it in three. Thor looked at the horn and
did not think it was very large, though it seemed pretty long, but he
was very thirsty. He put it to his lips and swallowed with all his
might, thinking that he should not have to bend over the horn a second
time. But when his breath gave out, and he looked into the horn to see
how it had gone with his drinking, it seemed to him difficult to
determine whether there was less in it than before. Then said
Utgard-Loke: That is well drunk, still it is not very much. I could
never have believed it, if anyone had told me, that Asa-Thor could not
drink more, but I know you will be able to empty it in a second draught.
Thor did not answer, but set the horn to his lips, thinking that he
would now take a larger draught. He drank as long as he could and drank
deep, as he was wont, but still he could not make the tip of the horn
come up as much as he would like. And when he set the horn away and
looked into it, it seemed to him that he had drunk less than the first
time; but the horn could now be borne without spilling. Then said
Utgard-Loke: How now, Thor! Are you not leaving more for the third
draught than befits your skill? It seems to me that if you are to empty
the horn with the third draught, then this will be the greatest. You
will not be deemed so great a man here among us as the asas call you, if
you do not distinguish yourself more in other feats than you seem to me
to have done in this. Then Thor became wroth, set the horn to his mouth
and drank with all his might and kept on as long as he could, and when
he looked into it its contents had indeed visibly diminished, but he
gave back the horn and would not drink any more. Said Utgard-Loke: It is
clear that your might is not so great as we thought. Would you like to
try other games? It is evident that you gained nothing by the first.
Answered Thor: I should like to try other games, but I should be
surprised if such a drink at home among the asas would be called small.
What game will you now offer me? Answered Utgard-Loke: Young lads here
think it nothing but play to lift my cat up from the ground, and I
should never have dared to offer such a thing to Asa-Thor had I not
already seen that you are much less of a man than I thought. Then there
sprang forth on the floor a gray cat, and it was rather large. Thor went
over to it, put his hand under the middle of its body and tried to lift
it up, but the cat bent its back in the same degree as Thor raised his
hands; and when he had stretched them up as far as he was able the cat
lifted one foot, and Thor did not carry the game any further. Then said
Utgard-Loke: This game ended as I expected. The cat is rather large, and
Thor is small, and little compared with the great men that are here with
us. Said Thor: Little as you call me, let anyone who likes come hither
and wrestle with me, for now I am wroth. Answered Utgard-Loke, looking
about him on the benches: I do not see anyone here who would not think
it a trifle to wrestle with you. And again he said: Let me see first!
Call hither that old woman, Elle, my foster-mother, and let Thor wrestle
with her if he wants to. She has thrown to the ground men who have
seemed to me no less strong than Thor. Then there came into the hall an
old woman. Utgard-Loke bade her take a wrestle with Asa-Thor. The tale
is not long. The result of the grapple was, that the more Thor tightened
his grasp, the firmer she stood. Then the woman began to bestir herself,
and Thor lost his footing. They had some very hard tussles, and before
long Thor was brought down on one knee. Then Utgard-Loke stepped
forward, bade them cease the wrestling, and added that Thor did not need
to challenge anybody else to wrestle with him in his hall, besides it
was now getting late. He showed Thor and his companions to seats, and
they spent the night there enjoying the best of hospitality.

48. At daybreak the next day Thor and his companions arose, dressed
themselves and were ready to depart. Then came Utgard-Loke and had the
table spread for them, and there was no lack of feasting both in food
and in drink. When they had breakfasted, they immediately departed from
the burg. Utgard-Loke went with them out of the burg, but at parting he
spoke to Thor and asked him how he thought his journey had turned out,
or whether he had ever met a mightier man than himself. Thor answered
that he could not deny that he had been greatly disgraced in this
meeting; and this I know, he added, that you will call me a man of
little account, whereat I am much mortified. Then said Utgard-Loke: Now
I will tell you the truth, since you have come out of the burg, that if
I live, and may have my way, you shall never enter it again; and this I
know, forsooth, that you should never have come into it had I before
known that you were so strong, and that you had come so near bringing us
into great misfortune. Know, then, that I have deceived you with
illusions. When I first found you in the woods I came to meet you, and
when you were to loose the provision-sack I had bound it with iron
threads, but you did not find where it was to be untied. In the next
place, you struck me three times with the hammer. The first blow was the
least, and still it was so severe that it would have been my death if it
had hit me. You saw near my burg a mountain cloven at the top into three
square dales, of which one was the deepest,--these were the dints made
by your hammer. The mountain I brought before the blows without your
seeing it. In like manner I deceived you in your contests with my
courtiers. In regard to the first, in which Loke took part, the facts
were as follows: He was very hungry and ate fast; but he whose name was
Loge was wildfire, and he burned the trough no less rapidly than the
meat. When Thjalfe ran a race with him whose name was Huge, that was my
thought, and it was impossible for him to keep pace with its swiftness.
When you drank from the horn, and thought that it diminished so little,
then, by my troth, it was a great wonder, which I never could have
deemed possible.. One end of the horn stood in the sea, but that you did
not see. When you come to the sea-shore you will discover how much the
sea has sunk by your drinking; that is now called the ebb. Furthermore
he said: Nor did it seem less wonderful to me that you lifted up the
cat; and, to tell you the truth, all who saw it were frightened when
they saw that you raised one of its feet from the ground, for it was not
such a cat as you thought. It was in reality the Midgard-serpent, which
surrounds all lands. It was scarcely long enough to touch the earth with
its tail and head, and you raised it so high that your hand nearly
reached to heaven. It was also a most astonishing feat when you wrestled
with Elle, for none has ever been, and none shall ever be, that Elle
(eld, old age) will not get the better of him, though he gets to be old
enough to abide her coming. And now the truth is that we must part; and
it will be better for us both that you do not visit me again. I will
again defend my burg with similar or other delusions, so that you will
get no power over me. When Thor heard this tale he seized his hammer and
lifted it into the air, but when he was about to strike he saw
Utgard-Loke nowhere; and when he turned back to the burg and was going
to dash that to pieces, he saw a beautiful and large plain, but no burg.
So he turned and went his way back to Thrudvang. But it is truthfully
asserted that he then resolved in his own mind to seek that meeting with
the Midgard-serpent, which afterward took place. And now I think that no
one can tell you truer tidings of this journey of Thor.

49. Then said Ganglere: A most powerful man is Utgard-Loke, though he
deals much with delusions and sorcery. His power is also proven by the
fact that he had thanes who were so mighty. But has not Thor avenged
himself for this? Made answer Har: It is not unknown, though no wise men
tell thereof, how Thor made amends for the journey that has now been
spoken of. He did not remain long at home, before he busked himself so
suddenly for a new journey, that he took neither chariot, nor goats nor
any companions with him. He went out of Midgard in the guise of a young
man, and came in the evening to a giant by name Hymer.[61] Thor tarried
there as a guest through the night. In the morning Hymer arose, dressed
himself, and busked himself to row out upon the sea to fish. Thor also
sprang up, got ready in a hurry and asked Hymer whether he might row out
with him. Hymer answered that he would get but little help from Thor, as
he was so small and young; and he added, you will get cold if I row as
far out and remain as long as I am wont. Thor said that he might row as
far from shore as he pleased, for all that, and it was yet to be seen
who would be the first to ask to row back to land. And Thor grew so
wroth at the giant that he came near letting the hammer ring on his head
straightway, but he restrained himself, for he intended to try his
strength elsewhere. He asked Hymer what they were to have for bait, but
Hymer replied that he would have to find his own bait. Then Thor turned
away to where he saw a herd of oxen, that belonged to Hymer. He took the
largest ox, which was called Himinbrjot, twisted his head off and
brought it down to the sea-strand. Hymer had then shoved the boat off.
Thor went on board and seated himself in the stern; he took two oars and
rowed so that Hymer had to confess that the boat sped fast from his
rowing. Hymer plied the oars in the bow, and thus the rowing soon ended.
Then said Hymer that they had come to the place where he was wont to sit
and catch flat-fish, but Thor said he would like to row much farther
out, and so they made another swift pull. Then said Hymer that they had
come so far out that it was dangerous to stay there, for the
Midgard-serpent. Thor said he wished to row a while longer, and so he
did; but Hymer was by no means in a happy mood. Thor took in the oars,
got ready a very strong line, and the hook was neither less nor weaker.
When he had put on the ox-head for bait, he cast it overboard and it
sank to the bottom. It must be admitted that Thor now beguiled the
Midgard-serpent not a whit less than Utgard-Loke mocked him when he was
to lift the serpent with his hand. The Midgard-serpent took the ox-head
into his mouth, whereby the hook entered his palate, but when the
serpent perceived this he tugged so hard that both Thor’s hands were
dashed against the gunwale. Now Thor became angry, assumed his asa-might
and spurned so hard that both his feet went through the boat and he
stood on the bottom of the sea. He pulled the serpent up to the gunwale;
and in truth no one has ever seen a more terrible sight than when Thor
whet his eyes on the serpent, and the latter stared at him and spouted
venom. It is said that the giant Hymer changed hue and grew pale from
fear when he saw the serpent and beheld the water flowing into the boat;
but just at the moment when Thor grasped the hammer and lifted it in the
air, the giant fumbled for his fishing-knife and cut off Thor’s line at
the gunwale, whereby the serpent sank back into the sea. Thor threw the
hammer after it, and it is even said that he struck off his head at the
bottom, but I think the truth is that the Midgard-serpent still lives
and lies in the ocean. Thor clenched his fist and gave the giant a box
on the ear so that he fell backward into the sea, and he saw his heels
last, but Thor waded ashore.

    [Footnote 61: Called Ymer in the Younger Edda, but the Elder Edda
    calls him Hymer.]




CHAPTER XV.

THE DEATH OF BALDER.


50. Then asked Ganglere: Have there happened any other remarkable things
among the asas? A great deed it was, forsooth, that Thor wrought on this
journey. Har answered: Yes, indeed, there are tidings to be told that
seemed of far greater importance to the asas. The beginning of this tale
is, that Balder dreamed dreams great and dangerous to his life. When he
told these dreams to the asas they took counsel together, and it was
decided that they should seek peace for Balder against all kinds of
harm. So Frigg exacted an oath from fire, water, iron and all kinds of
metal, stones, earth, trees, sicknesses, beasts, birds and creeping
things, that they should not hurt Balder. When this was done and made
known, it became the pastime of Balder and the asas that he should stand
up at their meetings while some of them should shoot at him, others
should hew at him, while others should throw stones at him; but no
matter what they did, no harm came to him, and this seemed to all a
great honor. When Loke, Laufey’s son, saw this, it displeased him very
much that Balder was not scathed. So he went to Frigg, in Fensal, having
taken on himself the likeness of a woman. Frigg asked this woman whether
she knew what the asas were doing at their meeting. She answered that
all were shooting at Balder, but that he was not scathed thereby. Then
said Frigg: Neither weapon nor tree can hurt Balder, I have taken an
oath from them all. Then asked the woman: Have all things taken an oath
to spare Balder? Frigg answered: West of Valhal there grows a little
shrub that is called the mistletoe, that seemed to me too young to exact
an oath from. Then the woman suddenly disappeared. Loke went and pulled
up the mistletoe and proceeded to the meeting. Hoder stood far to one
side in the ring of men, because he was blind. Loke addressed himself to
him, and asked: Why do you not shoot at Balder? He answered: Because I
do not see where he is, and furthermore I have no weapons. Then said
Loke: Do like the others and show honor to Balder; I will show you where
he stands; shoot at him with this wand. Hoder took the mistletoe and
shot at Balder under the guidance of Loke. The dart pierced him and he
fell dead to the ground. This is the greatest misfortune that has ever
happened to gods and men. When Balder had fallen, the asas were struck
speechless with horror, and their hands failed them to lay hold of the
corpse. One looked at the other, and all were of one mind toward him who
had done the deed, but being assembled in a holy peace-stead, no one
could take vengeance. When the asas at length tried to speak, the
wailing so choked their voices that one could not describe to the other
his sorrow. Odin took this misfortune most to heart, since he best
comprehended how great a loss and injury the fall of Balder was to the
asas. When the gods came to their senses, Frigg spoke and asked who
there might be among the asas who desired to win all her love and good
will by riding the way to Hel and trying to find Balder, and offering
Hel a ransom if she would allow Balder to return home again to Asgard.
But he is called Hermod, the Nimble, Odin’s swain, who undertook this
journey. Odin’s steed, Sleipner, was led forth. Hermod mounted him and
galloped away.

51. The asas took the corpse of Balder and brought it to the sea-shore.
Hringhorn was the name of Balder’s ship, and it was the largest of all
ships. The gods wanted to launch it and make Balder’s bale-fire thereon,
but they could not move it. Then they sent to Jotunheim after the
giantess whose name is Hyrrokken. She came riding on a wolf, and had
twisted serpents for reins. When she alighted, Odin appointed four
berserks to take care of her steed, but they were unable to hold him
except by throwing him down on the ground. Hyrrokken went to the prow
and launched the ship with one single push, but the motion was so
violent that fire sprang from the underlaid rollers and all the earth
shook. Then Thor became wroth, grasped his hammer, and would forthwith
have crushed her skull, had not all the gods asked peace for her.
Balder’s corpse was borne out on the ship; and when his wife, Nanna,
daughter of Nep, saw this, her heart was broken with grief and she died.
She was borne to the funeral-pile and cast on the fire. Thor stood by
and hallowed the pile with Mjolner. Before his feet ran a dwarf, whose
name is Lit. Him Thor kicked with his foot and dashed him into the fire,
and he, too, was burned. But this funeral-pile was attended by many
kinds of folk. First of all came Odin, accompanied by Frigg and the
valkyries and his ravens. Frey came riding in his chariot drawn by the
boar called Gullinburste or Slidrugtanne. Heimdal rode his steed
Gulltop, and Freyja drove her cats. There was a large number of
frost-giants and mountain-giants. Odin laid on the funeral-pile his gold
ring, Draupner, which had the property of producing, every ninth night,
eight gold rings of equal weight. Balder’s horse, fully caparisoned, was
led to his master’s pile.

52. But of Hermod it is to be told that he rode nine nights through deep
and dark valleys, and did not see light until he came to the
Gjallar-river and rode on the Gjallar-bridge, which is thatched with
shining gold. Modgud is the name of the may who guards the bridge. She
asked him for his name, and of what kin he was, saying that the day
before there rode five fylkes (kingdoms, bands) of dead men over the
bridge; but she added, it does not shake less under you alone, and you
do not have the hue of dead men. Why do you ride the way to Hel? He
answered: I am to ride to Hel to find Balder. Have you seen him pass
this way? She answered that Balder had ridden over the Gjallar-bridge;
adding: But downward and northward lies the way to Hel. Then Hermod rode
on till he came to Hel’s gate. He alighted from his horse, drew the
girths tighter, remounted him, clapped the spurs into him, and the horse
leaped over the gate with so much force that he never touched it.
Thereupon Hermod proceeded to the hall and alighted from his steed. He
went in, and saw there sitting on the foremost seat his brother Balder.
He tarried there over night. In the morning he asked Hel whether Balder
might ride home with him, and told how great weeping there was among the
asas. But Hel replied that it should now be tried whether Balder was so
much beloved as was said. If all things, said she, both quick and dead,
will weep for him, then he shall go back to the asas, but if anything
refuses to shed tears, then he shall remain with Hel. Hermod arose, and
Balder accompanied him out of the hall. He took the ring Draupner and
sent it as a keepsake to Odin. Nanna sent Frigg a kerchief and other
gifts, and to Fulla she sent a ring. Thereupon Hermod rode back and came
to Asgard, where he reported the tidings he had seen and heard.

53. Then the asas sent messengers over all the world, praying that
Balder might be wept out of Hel’s power. All things did so,--men and
beasts, the earth, stones, trees and all metals, just as you must have
seen that these things weep when they come out of frost and into heat.
When the messengers returned home and had done their errand well, they
found a certain cave wherein sat a giantess (gygr = ogress) whose name
was Thok. They requested her to weep Balder from Hel; but she answered:

  Thok will weep
  With dry tears
  For Balder’s burial;
  Neither in life nor in death
  Gave he me gladness.
  Let Hel keep what she has!

It is generally believed that this Thok was Loke, Laufey’s son, who has
wrought most evil among the asas.

54. Then said Ganglere: A very great wrong did Loke perpetrate; first of
all in causing Balder’s death, and next in standing in the way of his
being loosed from Hel. Did he get no punishment for this misdeed? Har
answered: Yes, he was repaid for this in a way that he will long
remember. The gods became exceedingly wroth, as might be expected. So he
ran away and hid himself in a rock. Here he built a house with four
doors, so that he might keep an outlook on all sides. Oftentimes in the
daytime he took on him the likeness of a salmon and concealed himself in
Frananger Force. Then he thought to himself what stratagems the asas
might have recourse to in order to catch him. Now, as he was sitting in
his house, he took flax and yarn and worked them into meshes, in the
manner that nets have since been made; but a fire was burning before
him. Then he saw that the asas were not far distant. Odin had seen from
Hlidskjalf where Loke kept himself. Loke immediately sprang up, cast the
net on the fire and leaped into the river. When the asas came to the
house, he entered first who was wisest of them all, and whose name was
Kvaser; and when he saw in the fire the ashes of the net that had been
burned, he understood that this must be a contrivance for catching fish,
and this he told to the asas. Thereupon they took flax and made
themselves a net after the pattern of that which they saw in the ashes
and which Loke had made. When the net was made, the asas went to the
river and cast it into the force. Thor held one end of the net, and all
the other asas laid hold on the other, thus jointly drawing it along the
stream. Loke went before it and laid himself down between two stones,
so that they drew the net over him, although they perceived that some
living thing touched the meshes. They went up to the force again and
cast out the net a second time. This time they hung a great weight to
it, making it so heavy that nothing could possibly pass under it. Loke
swam before the net, but when he saw that he was near the sea he sprang
over the top of the net and hastened back to the force. When the asas
saw whither he went they proceeded up to the force, dividing themselves
into two bands, but Thor waded in the middle of the stream, and so they
dragged the net along to the sea. Loke saw that he now had only two
chances of escape,--either to risk his life and swim out to sea, or to
leap again over the net. He chose the latter, and made a tremendous leap
over the top line of the net. Thor grasped after him and caught him, but
he slipped in his hand so that Thor did not get a firm hold before he
got to the tail, and this is the reason why the salmon has so slim a
tail. Now Loke was taken without truce and was brought to a cave. The
gods took three rocks and set them up on edge, and bored a hole through
each rock. Then they took Loke’s sons, Vale and Nare or Narfe. Vale they
changed into the likeness of a wolf, whereupon he tore his brother Narfe
to pieces, with whose intestines the asas bound Loke over the three
rocks. One stood under his shoulders, another under his loins, and the
third under his hams, and the fetters became iron. Skade took a serpent
and fastened up over him, so that the venom should drop from the serpent
into his face. But Sigyn, his wife, stands by him, and holds a dish
under the venom-drops. Whenever the dish becomes full, she goes and
pours away the venom, and meanwhile the venom drops onto Loke’s face.
Then he twists his body so violently that the whole earth shakes, and
this you call earthquakes. There he will lie bound until Ragnarok.




CHAPTER XVI.

RAGNAROK.


55. Then said Ganglere: What tidings are to be told of Ragnarok? Of this
I have never heard before. Har answered: Great things are to be said
thereof. First, there is a winter called the Fimbul-winter, when snow
drives from all quarters, the frosts are so severe, the winds so keen
and piercing, that there is no joy in the sun. There are three such
winters in succession, without any intervening summer. But before these
there are three other winters, during which great wars rage over all the
world. Brothers slay each other for the sake of gain, and no one spares
his father or mother in that manslaughter and adultery. Thus says the
Vala’s Prophecy:

  Brothers will fight together
  And become each other’s bane;
  Sisters’ children
  Their sib shall spoil.[62]
  Hard is the world,
  Sensual sins grow huge.
  There are ax-ages, sword-ages--
  Shields are cleft in twain,--
  There are wind-ages, wolf-ages,
  Ere the world falls dead.[63]

    [Footnote 62: Commit adultery.]

    [Footnote 63: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 48, 49.]

Then happens what will seem a great miracle, that the wolf[64] devours
the sun, and this will seem a great loss. The other wolf will devour the
moon, and this too will cause great mischief. The stars shall be Hurled
from heaven. Then it shall come to pass that the earth and the mountains
will shake so violently that trees will be torn up by the roots, the
mountains will topple down, and all bonds and fetters will be broken and
snapped. The Fenris-wolf gets loose. The sea rushes over the earth, for
the Midgard-serpent writhes in giant rage and seeks to gain the land.
The ship that is called Naglfar also becomes loose. It is made of the
nails of dead men; wherefore it is worth warning that, when a man dies
with unpared nails, he supplies a large amount of materials for the
building of this ship, which both gods and men wish may be finished as
late as possible. But in this flood Naglfar gets afloat. The giant Hrym
is its steersman. The Fenris-wolf advances with wide open mouth; the
upper jaw reaches to heaven and the lower jaw is on the earth. He would
open it still wider had he room. Fire flashes from his eyes and
nostrils. The Midgard-serpent vomits forth venom, defiling all the air
and the sea; he is very terrible, and places himself by the side of the
wolf. In the midst of this clash and din the heavens are rent in twain,
and the sons of Muspel come riding through the opening. Surt rides
first, and before him and after him flames burning fire. He has a very
good sword, which shines brighter than the sun. As they ride over
Bifrost it breaks to pieces, as has before been stated. The sons of
Muspel direct their course to the plain which is called Vigrid. Thither
repair also the Fenris-wolf and the Midgard-serpent. To this place have
also come Loke and Hrym, and with him all the frost-giants. In Loke’s
company are all the friends of Hel. The sons of Muspel have there
effulgent bands alone by themselves. The plain Vigrid is one hundred
miles (rasts) on each side.

    [Footnote 64: Fenris-wolf.]

56. While these things are happening, Heimdal stands up, blows with all
his might in the Gjallar-horn and awakens all the gods, who thereupon
hold counsel. Odin rides to Mimer’s well to ask advice of Mimer for
himself and his folk. Then quivers the ash Ygdrasil, and all things in
heaven and earth fear and tremble. The asas and the einherjes arm
themselves and speed forth to the battle-field. Odin rides first; with
his golden helmet, resplendent byrnie, and his spear Gungner, he
advances against the Fenris-wolf. Thor stands by his side, but can give
him no assistance, for he has his hands full in his struggle with the
Midgard-serpent. Frey encounters Surt, and heavy blows are exchanged ere
Frey falls. The cause of his death is that he has not that good sword
which he gave to Skirner. Even the dog Garm, that was bound before the
Gnipa-cave, gets loose. He is the greatest plague. He contends with Tyr,
and they kill each other. Thor gets great renown by slaying the
Midgard-serpent, but retreats only nine paces when he falls to the earth
dead, poisoned by the venom that the serpent blows on him. The wolf
swallows Odin, and thus causes his death; but Vidar immediately turns
and rushes at the wolf, placing one foot on his nether jaw. On this foot
he has the shoe for which materials have been gathering through all
ages, namely, the strips of leather which men cut off for the toes and
heels of shoes; wherefore he who wishes to render assistance to the asas
must cast these strips away. With one hand Vidar seizes the upper jaw of
the wolf, and thus rends asunder his mouth. Thus the wolf perishes. Loke
fights with Heimdal, and they kill each other. Thereupon Surt flings
fire over the earth and burns up all the world. Thus it is said in the
Vala’s Prophecy:

  Loud blows Heimdal
  His uplifted horn.
  Odin speaks
  With Mimer’s head.
  The straight-standing ash
  Ygdrasil quivers,
  The old tree groans,
  And the giant gets loose.

  How fare the asas?
  How fare the elves?
  All Jotunheim roars.
  The asas hold counsel;
  Before their stone-doors
  Groan the dwarfs,
  The guides of the wedge-rock.
  Know you now more or not?

  From the east drives Hrym,
  Bears his shield before him.
  Jormungand welters
  In giant rage
  And smites the waves.
  The eagle screams,
  And with pale beak tears corpses,
  Naglfar gets loose.

  A ship comes from the east,
  The hosts of Muspel
  Come o’er the main,
  And Loke is steersman.
  All the fell powers
  Are with the wolf;
  Along with them
  Is Byleist’s brother.[65]

  From the south comes Surt
  With blazing fire-brand,--
  The sun of the war-god
  Shines from his sword.
  Mountains dash together,
  Giant maids are frightened,
  Heroes go the way to Hel,
  And heaven is rent in twain.

  Then comes to Hlin
  Another woe,
  When Odin goes
  With the wolf to fight,
  And Bele’s bright slayer[66]
  To contend with Surt.
  There will fall
  Frigg’s beloved.

  Odin’s son goes
  To fight with the wolf,
  And Vidar goes on his way
  To the wild beast.[67]
  With his hand he thrusts
  His sword to the heart
  Of the giant’s child,
  And avenges his father.

  Then goes the famous
  Son[68] of Hlodyn
  To fight with the serpent.
  Though about to die,
  He fears not the contest;
  All men
  Abandon their homesteads
  When the warder of Midgard
  In wrath slays the serpent.

  The sun grows dark,
  The earth sinks into the sea,
  The bright stars
  From heaven vanish;
  Fire rages,
  Heat blazes,
  And high flames play
  ’Gainst heaven itself.[69]

    [Footnote 65: Loke.]

    [Footnote 66: Frey.]

    [Footnote 67: The Fenris-wolf.]

    [Footnote 68: Thor.]

    [Footnote 69: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 50-52, 54-57, 59,
    60, 62, 63.]

And again it is said as follows:

  Vigrid is the name of the plain
  Where in fight shall meet
  Surt and the gentle god.
  A hundred miles
  It is every way.
  This field is marked out for them.[70]

    [Footnote 70: Elder Edda: Vafthrudner’s Lay, 18.]




CHAPTER XVII.

REGENERATION.


57. Then asked Ganglere: What happens when heaven and earth and all the
world are consumed in flames, and when all the gods and all the
einherjes and all men are dead? You have already said that all men shall
live in some world through all ages. Har answered: There are many good
and many bad abodes. Best it is to be in Gimle, in heaven. Plenty is
there of good drink for those who deem this a joy in the hall called
Brimer. That is also in heaven. There is also an excellent hall which
stands on the Nida mountains. It is built of red gold, and is called
Sindre. In this hall good and well-minded men shall dwell. Nastrand is a
large and terrible hall, and its doors open to the north. It is built of
serpents wattled together, and all the heads of the serpents turn into
the hall and vomit forth venom that flows in streams along the hall, and
in these streams wade perjurers and murderers. So it is here said:

  A hall I know standing
  Far from the sun
  On the strand of dead bodies.
  Drops of venom
  Fall through the loop-holes.
  Of serpents’ backs
  The hall is made.

  There shall wade
  Through heavy streams
  Perjurers
  And murderers.

But in Hvergelmer it is worst.

  There tortures Nidhug
  The bodies of the dead.[71]

    [Footnote 71: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 40, 41.]

58. Then said Ganglere: Do any gods live then? Is there any earth or
heaven? Har answered: The earth rises again from the sea, and is green
and fair. The fields unsown produce their harvests. Vidar and Vale live.
Neither the sea nor Surfs fire has harmed them, and they dwell on the
plains of Ida, where Asgard was before. Thither come also the sons of
Thor, Mode and Magne, and they have Mjolner. Then come Balder and Hoder
from Hel. They all sit together and talk about the things that happened
aforetime,--about the Midgard-serpent and the Fenris-wolf. They find in
the grass those golden tables which the asas once had. Thus it is said:

  Vidar and Vale
  Dwell in the house of the gods,
  When quenched is the fire of Surt.
  Mode and Magne
  Vingner’s Mjolner shall have
  When the fight is ended.[72]

    [Footnote 72: Elder Edda: Vafthrudner’s Lay, 51.]

In a place called Hodmimer’s-holt[73] are concealed two persons during
Surt’s fire, called Lif and Lifthraser. They feed on the morning dew.
From these so numerous a race is descended that they fill the whole
world with people, as is here said:

  Lif and Lifthraser
  Will lie hid
  In Hodmimer’s-holt.
  The morning dew
  They have for food.
  From them are the races descended.[74]

    [Footnote 73: Holt = grove.]

    [Footnote 74: Elder Edda: Vafthrudner’s Lay, 45.]

But what will seem wonderful to you is that the sun has brought forth a
daughter not less fair than herself, and she rides in the heavenly
course of her mother, as is here said:

  A daughter
  Is born of the sun
  Ere Fenrer takes her.
  In her mother’s course
  When the gods are dead
  This maid shall ride.[75]

    [Footnote 75: Elder Edda: Vafthrudner’s Lay, 47.]

And if you now can ask more questions, said Har to Ganglere, I know not
whence that power came to you. I have never heard any one tell further
the fate of the world. Make now the best use you can of what has been
told you.

59. Then Ganglere heard a terrible noise on all sides, and when he
looked about him he stood out-doors on a level plain. He saw neither
hall nor burg. He went his way and came back to his kingdom, and told
the tidings which he had seen and heard, and ever since those tidings
have been handed down from man to man.




AFTERWORD

TO THE FOOLING OF GYLFE.


The asas now sat down to talk, and held their counsel, and remembered
all the tales that were told to Gylfe. They gave the very same names
that had been named before to the men and places that were there. This
they did for the reason that, when a long time has elapsed, men should
not doubt that those asas of whom these tales were now told and those to
whom the same names were given were all identical. There was one who is
called Thor, and he is Asa-Thor, the old. He is Oku-Thor, and to him are
ascribed the great deeds done by Hektor in Troy. But men think that the
Turks have told of Ulysses, and have called him Loke, for the Turks were
his greatest enemies.




BRAGE’S TALK.


CHAPTER I.

ÆGER’S JOURNEY TO ASGARD.


1. A man by name Æger, or Hler, who dwelt on the island called Hler’s
Isle, was well skilled in the black art. He made a journey to Asgard.
But the asas knew of his coming and gave him a friendly reception; but
they also made use of many sorts of delusions. In the evening, when the
feast began, Odin had swords brought into the hall, and they were so
bright that it glistened from them so that there was no need of any
other light while they sat drinking. Then went the asas to their feast,
and the twelve asas who were appointed judges seated themselves in their
high-seats. These are their names: Thor, Njord, Frey, Tyr, Heimdal,
Brage, Vidar, Vale, Uller, Honer, Forsete, Loke. The asynjes (goddesses)
also were with them: Frigg, Freyja, Gefjun, Idun, Gerd, Sigyn, Fulla,
Nanna. Æger thought all that he saw looked very grand. The panels of the
walls were all covered with beautiful shields. The mead was very strong,
and they drank deep. Next to Æger sat Brage, and they talked much
together over their drink. Brage spoke to Æger of many things that had
happened to the asas.




CHAPTER II.

IDUN AND HER APPLES.


2. Brage began his tale by telling how three asas, Odin, Loke and Honer,
went on a journey over mountains and heaths, where they could get
nothing to eat. But when they came down into a valley they saw a herd of
cattle. From this herd they took an ox and went to work to boil it. When
they deemed that it must be boiled enough they uncovered the broth, but
it was not yet done. After a little while they lifted the cover off
again, but it was not yet boiled. They talked among themselves about how
this could happen. Then they heard a voice in the oak above them, and he
who sat there said that he was the cause that the broth did not get
boiled. They looked up and saw an eagle, and it was not a small one.
Then said the eagle: If you will give me my fill of the ox, then the
broth will be boiled. They agreed to this. So he flew down from the
tree, seated himself beside the boiling broth, and immediately snatched
up first the two thighs of the ox and then both the shoulders. This made
Loke wroth: he grasped a large pole, raised it with all his might and
dashed it at the body of the eagle. The eagle shook himself after the
blow and flew up. One end of the pole fastened itself to the body of the
eagle, and the other end stuck to Loke’s hands. The eagle flew just high
enough so that Loke’s feet were dragged over stones and rocks and trees,
and it seemed to him that his arms would be torn from his
shoulder-blades. He calls and prays the eagle most earnestly for peace,
but the latter declares that Loke shall never get free unless he will
pledge himself to bring Idun and her apples out of Asgard. When Loke had
promised this, he was set free and went to his companions again; and no
more is related of this journey, except that they returned home. But at
the time agreed upon, Loke coaxed Idun out of Asgard into a forest,
saying that he had found apples that she would think very nice, and he
requested her to take with her her own apples in order to compare them.
Then came the giant Thjasse in the guise of an eagle, seized Idun and
flew away with her to his home in Thrymheim. The asas were ill at ease
on account of the disappearance of Idun,--they became gray-haired and
old. They met in council and asked each other who last had seen Idun.
The last that had been seen of her was that she had gone out of Asgard
in company with Loke. Then Loke was seized and brought into the council,
and he was threatened with death or torture. But he became frightened,
and promised to bring Idun back from Jotunheim if Freyja would lend him
the falcon-guise that she had. He got the falcon-guise, flew north into
Jotunheim, and came one day to the giant Thjasse. The giant had rowed
out to sea, and Idun was at home alone. Loke turned her into the
likeness of a nut, held her in his claws and flew with all his might.
But when Thjasse returned home and missed Idun, he took on his
eagle-guise, flew after Loke, gaining on the latter with his eagle
wings. When the asas saw the falcon coming flying with the nut, and how
the eagle flew, they went to the walls of Asgard and brought with them
bundles of plane-shavings. When the falcon flew within the burg, he let
himself drop down beside the burg-wall. Then the asas kindled a fire in
the shavings; and the eagle, being unable to stop himself when he missed
the falcon, caught fire in his feathers, so that he could not fly any
farther. The asas were on hand and slew the giant Thjasse within the
gates of Asgard, and that slaughter is most famous.




CHAPTER III.

HOW NJORD GOT SKADE TO WIFE.


Skade, the daughter of the giant Thjasse, donned her helmet, and byrnie,
and all her war-gear, and betook herself to Asgard to avenge her
father’s death. The asas offered her ransom and atonement; and it was
agreed to, in the first place, that she should choose herself a husband
among the asas, but she was to make her choice by the feet, which was
all she was to see of their persons. She saw one man’s feet that were
wonderfully beautiful, and exclaimed: This one I choose! On Balder there
are few blemishes. But it was Njord, from Noatun. In the second place,
it was stipulated that the asas were to do what she did not deem them
capable of, and that was to make her laugh. Then Loke tied one end of a
string fast to the beard of a goat and the other around his own body,
and one pulled this way and the other that, and both of them shrieked
out loud. Then Loke let himself fall on Skade’s knees, and this made her
laugh. It is said that Odin did even more than was asked, in that he
took Thjasse’s eyes and cast them up into heaven, and made two stars of
them. Then said Æger: This Thjasse seems to me to have been considerable
of a man; of what kin was he? Brage answered: His father’s name was
Olvalde, and if I told you of him, you would deem it very remarkable.
He was very rich in gold, and when he died and his sons were to divide
their heritage, they had this way of measuring the gold, that each
should take his mouthful of gold, and they should all take the same
number of mouthfuls. One of them was Thjasse, another Ide, and the third
Gang. But we now have it as a saw among us, that we call gold the
mouth-number of these giants. In runes and songs we wrap the gold up by
calling it the measure, or word, or tale, of these giants. Then said
Æger: It seems to me that it will be well hidden in the runes.




CHAPTER IV.

THE ORIGIN OF POETRY.


3. And again said Æger: Whence originated the art that is called
skaldship? Made answer Brage: The beginning of this was, that the gods
had a war with the people that are called vans. They agreed to hold a
meeting for the purpose of making peace, and settled their dispute in
this wise, that they both went to a jar and spit into it. But at parting
the gods, being unwilling to let this mark of peace perish, shaped it
into a man whose name was Kvaser, and who was so wise that no one could
ask him any question that he could not answer. He traveled much about in
the world to teach men wisdom. Once he came to the home of the dwarfs
Fjalar and Galar. They called him aside, saying they wished to speak
with him alone, slew him and let his blood run into two jars called Son
and Bodn, and into a kettle called Odrarer. They mixed honey with the
blood, and thus was produced such mead that whoever drinks from it
becomes a skald and sage. The dwarfs told the asas that Kvaser had
choked in his wisdom, because no one was so wise that he could ask him
enough about learning.

4. Then the dwarfs invited to themselves the giant whose name is
Gilling, and his wife; and when he came they asked him to row out to sea
with them. When they had gotten a short distance from shore, the dwarfs
rowed onto a blind rock and capsized the boat. Gilling, who was unable
to swim, was drowned, but the dwarfs righted the boat again and rowed
ashore. When they told of this mishap to his wife she took it much to
heart, and began to cry aloud. Then Fjalar asked her whether it would
not lighten her sorrow if she could look out upon the sea where her
husband had perished, and she said it would. He then said to his brother
Galar that he should go up over the doorway, and as she passed out he
should let a mill-stone drop onto her head, for he said he was tired of
her bawling, Galar did so. When the giant Suttung, the son of Gilling,
found this out he came and seized the dwarfs, took them out to sea and
left them on a rocky island, which was flooded at high tide. They prayed
Suttung to spare their lives, and offered him in atonement for their
father’s blood the precious mead, which he accepted. Suttung brought the
mead home with him, and hid it in a place called Hnitbjorg. He set his
daughter Gunlad to guard it. For these reasons we call songship Kvaser’s
blood; the drink of the dwarfs; the dwarfs’ fill; some kind of liquor of
Odrarer, or Bodn or Son; the ship of the dwarfs (because this mead
ransomed their lives from the rocky isle); the mead of Suttung, or the
liquor of Hnitbjorg.

5. Then remarked Æger: It seems dark to me to call songship by these
names; but how came the asas by Suttung’s mead? Answered Brage: The saga
about this is, that Odin set out from home and came to a place where
nine thralls were mowing hay. He asked them whether they would like to
have him whet their scythes. To this they said yes. Then he took a
whet-stone from his belt and whetted the scythes. They thought their
scythes were much improved, and asked whether the whet-stone was for
sale. He answered that he who would buy it must pay a fair price for it.
All said they were willing to give the sum demanded, and each wanted
Odin to sell it to him. But he threw the whet-stone up in the air, and
when all wished to catch it they scrambled about it in such a manner
that each brought his scythe onto the other’s neck. Odin sought lodgings
for the night at the house of the giant Bauge, who was a brother of
Suttung. Bauge complained of what had happened to his household, saying
that his nine thralls had slain each other, and that he did not know
where he should get other workmen. Odin called himself Bolverk. He
offered to undertake the work of the nine men for Bauge, but asked in
payment therefor a drink of Suttung’s mead. Bauge answered that he had
no control over the mead, saying that Suttung was bound to keep that for
himself alone. But he agreed to go with Bolverk and try whether they
could get the mead. During the summer Bolverk did the work of the nine
men for Bauge, but when winter came he asked for his pay. Then they both
went to Suttung. Bauge explained to Suttung his bargain with Bolverk,
but Suttung stoutly refused to give even a drop of the mead. Bolverk
then proposed to Bauge that they should try whether they could not get
at the mead by the aid of some trick, and Bauge agreed to this. Then
Bolverk drew forth the auger which is called Rate, and requested Bauge
to bore a hole through the rock, if the auger was sharp enough. He did
so. Then said Bauge that there was a hole through the rock; but Bolverk
blowed into the hole that the auger had made, and the chips flew back
into his face. Thus he saw that Bauge intended to deceive him, and
commanded him to bore through. Bauge bored again, and when Bolverk blew
a second time the chips flew inward. Now Bolverk changed himself into
the likeness of a serpent and crept into the auger-hole. Bauge thrust
after him with the auger, but missed him. Bolverk went to where Gunlad
was, and shared her couch for three nights. She then promised to give
him three draughts from the mead. With the first draught he emptied
Odrarer, in the second Bodn, and in the third Son, and thus he had all
the mead. Then he took on the guise of an eagle, and flew off as fast as
he could. When Suttung saw the flight of the eagle, he also took on the
shape of an eagle and flew after him. When the asas saw Odin coming,
they set their jars out in the yard. When Odin reached Asgard, he spewed
the mead up into the jars. He was, however, so near being caught by
Suttung, that he sent some of the mead after him backward, and as no
care was taken of this, anybody that wished might have it. This we call
the share of poetasters. But Suttung’s mead Odin gave to the asas and to
those men who are able to make verses. Hence we call songship Odin’s
prey, Odin’s find, Odin’s drink, Odin’s gift, and the drink of the asas.

6. Then said Æger: In how many ways do you vary the poetical
expressions, or how many kinds of poetry are there? Answered Brage:
There are two kinds, and all poetry falls into one or the other of these
classes. Æger asks: Which two? Brage answers: Diction and meter. What
diction is used in poetry? There are three sorts of poetic diction.
Which? One is to name everything by its own name; another is to name it
with a pronoun, but the third sort of diction is called _kenning_ (a
poetical periphrasis or descriptive name); and this sort is so managed
that when we name Odin, or Thor or Tyr, or any other of the asas or
elves, we add to their name a reference to some other asa, or we make
mention of some of his works. Then the appellation belongs to him who
corresponds to the whole phrase, and not to him who was actually named.
Thus we speak of Odin as Sigtyr, Hangatyr or Farmatyr, and such names we
call simple appellatives. In the same manner he is called Reidartyr.




AFTERWORD

TO BRAGE’S TALK.


Now it is to be said to young skalds who are desirous of acquiring the
diction of poetry, or of increasing their store of words with old names,
or, on the other hand, are eager to understand what is obscurely sung,
that they must master this book for their instruction and pastime. These
sagas are not to be so forgotten or disproved as to take away from
poetry old periphrases which great skalds have been pleased with. But
christian men should not believe in heathen gods, nor in the truth of
these sagas, otherwise than is explained in the beginning of this book,
where the events are explained which led men away from the true faith,
and where it, in the next place, is told of the Turks how the men from
Asia, who are called asas, falsified the tales of the things that
happened in Troy, in order that the people should believe them to be
gods.

King Priam in Troy was a great chief over all the Turkish host, and his
sons were the most distinguished men in his whole army. That excellent
hall, which the asas called Brime’s Hall, or beer-hall, was King Priam’s
palace. As for the long tale that they tell of Ragnarok, that is the
wars of the Trojans. When it is said that Oku-Thor angled with an
ox-head and drew on board the Midgard-serpent, but that the serpent kept
his life and sank back into the sea, then this is another version of the
story that Hektor slew Volukrontes, a famous hero, in the presence of
Achilleus, and so drew the latter onto him with the head of the slain,
which they likened unto the head of an ox, which Oku-Thor had torn off.
When Achilleus was drawn into this danger, on account of his daring,
it was the salvation of his life that he fled from the fatal blows of
Hektor, although he was wounded. It is also said that Hektor waged the
war so mightily, and that his rage was so great when he caught sight of
Achilleus, that nothing was so strong that it could stand before him.
When he missed Achilleus, who had fled, he soothed his wrath by slaying
the champion called Roddros. But the asas say that when Oku-Thor missed
the serpent, he slew the giant Hymer. In Ragnarok the Midgard serpent
came suddenly upon Thor and blew venom onto him, and thus struck him
dead. But the asas could not make up their minds to say that this had
been the fate of Oku-Thor, that anyone stood over him dead, though this
had so happened. They rushed headlong over old sagas more than was true
when they said that the Midgard-serpent there got his death; and they
added this to the story, that Achilleus reaped the fame of Hektor’s
death, though he lay dead on the same battle-field on that account. This
was the work of Elenus and Alexander, and Elenus the asas call Ale. They
say that he avenged his brother, and that he lived when all the gods
were dead, and after the fire was quenched that burned up Asgard and all
the possessions of the gods. Pyrrhos they compared with the Fenris-wolf.
He slew Odin, and Pyrrhos might be called a wolf according to their
belief, for he did not spare the peace-steads, when he slew the king in
the temple before the altar of Thor. The burning of Troy they call the
flame of Surt. Mode and Magne, the sons of Oku-Thor, came to crave the
land of Ale or Vidar. He is Æneas. He came away from Troy, and wrought
thereupon great works. It is said that the sons of Hektor came to
Frigialand and established themselves in that kingdom, but banished
Elenus.




EXTRACTS FROM

THE POETICAL DICTION.

(SKALDSKAPARMAL.)[76]

    [Footnote 76: This part of the Younger Edda corresponds to the
    Latin Ars Poetica, and contains the rules and laws of ancient
    poetry.]


THOR AND HRUNGNER.

Brage told Æger that Thor had gone eastward to crush trolls. Odin rode
on his horse Sleipner to Jotunheim, and came to the giant whose name is
Hrungner. Then asked Hrungner what man that was who with a golden helmet
rode both through the air and over the sea, and added that he had a
remarkably good horse. Odin said that he would wager his head that so
good a horse could not be found in Jotunheim. Hrungner admitted that it
was indeed an excellent horse, but he had one, called Goldfax, that
could take much longer paces; and in his wrath he immediately sprang
upon his horse and galloped after Odin, intending to pay him for his
insolence. Odin rode so fast that he was a good distance ahead, but
Hrungner had worked himself into such a giant rage that, before he was
aware of it, he had come within the gates of Asgard. When he came to the
hall door, the asas invited him to drink with them. He entered the hall
and requested a drink. They then took the bowls that Thor was accustomed
to drink from, and Hrungner emptied them all. When he became drunk, he
gave the freest vent to his loud boastings. He said he was going to take
Valhal and move it to Jotunheim, demolish Asgard and kill all the gods
except Freyja and Sif, whom he was going to take home with him. When
Freyja went forward to refill the bowls for him, he boasted that he was
going to drink up all the ale of the asas. But when the asas grew weary
of his arrogance, they named Thor’s name. At once Thor was in the hall,
swung his hammer in the air, and, being exceedingly wroth, asked who was
to blame that dog-wise giants were permitted to drink there, who had
given Hrungner permission to be in Valhal, and why Freyja should pour
ale for him as she did in the feasts of the asas. Then answered
Hrungner, looking with anything but friendly eyes at Thor, and said that
Odin had invited him to drink, and that he was there under his
protection. Thor replied that he should come to rue that invitation
before he came out. Hrungner again answered that it would be but little
credit to Asa-Thor to kill him, unarmed as he was. It would be a greater
proof of his valor if he dared fight a duel with him at the boundaries
of his territory, at Grjottungard. It was very foolish of me, he said,
that I left my shield and my flint-stone at home; had I my weapons here,
you and I would try a holmgang (duel on a rocky island); but as this is
not the case, I declare you a coward if you kill me unarmed. Thor was by
no means the man to refuse to fight a duel when he was challenged, an
honor which never had been shown him before. Then Hrungner went his way,
and hastened with all his might back to Jotunheim. His journey became
famous among the giants, and the proposed meeting with Thor was much
talked of. They regarded it very important who should gain the victory,
and they feared the worst from Thor if Hrungner should be defeated, for
he was the strongest among them. Thereupon the giants made at
Grjottungard a man of clay, who was nine rasts tall and three rasts
broad under the arms, but being unable to find a heart large enough to
be suitable for him, they took the heart from a mare, but even this
fluttered and trembled when Thor came. Hrungner had, as is well known,
a heart of stone, sharp and three-sided; just as the rune has since been
risted that is called Hrungner’s heart. Even his head was of stone. His
shield was of stone, and was broad and thick, and he was holding this
shield before him as he stood at Grjottungard waiting for Thor. His
weapon was a flint-stone, which he swung over his shoulders, and
altogether he presented a most formidable aspect. On one side of him
stood the giant of clay, who was named Mokkerkalfe. He was so
exceedingly terrified, that it is said that he wet himself when he saw
Thor. Thor proceeded to the duel, and Thjalfe was with him. Thjalfe ran
forward to where Hrungner was standing, and said to him: You stand illy
guarded, giant; you hold the shield before you, but Thor has seen you;
he goes down into the earth and will attack you from below. Then
Hrungner thrust the shield under his feet and stood on it, but the
flint-stone he seized with both his hands. The next that he saw were
flashes of lightning, and he heard loud crashings; and then he saw Thor
in his asa-might advancing with impetuous speed, swinging his hammer and
hurling it from afar at Hrungner. Hrungner seized the flint-stone with
both his hands and threw it against the hammer. They met in the air, and
the flint-stone broke. One part fell to the earth, and from it have come
the flint-mountains; the other part hit Thor’s head with such force that
he fell forward to the ground. But the hammer Mjolner hit Hrungner right
in the head, and crushed his skull in small pieces. He himself fell
forward over Thor, so that his foot lay upon Thor’s neck. Meanwhile
Thjalfe attacked Mokkerkalfe, who fell with but little honor. Then
Thjalfe went to Thor and was to take Hrungner’s foot off from him, but
he had not the strength to do it. When the asas learned that Thor had
fallen, they all came to take the giant’s foot off, but none of them was
able to move it. Then came Magne, the son of Thor and Jarnsaxa. He was
only three nights of age. He threw Hrungner’s foot off Thor, and said It
was a great mishap, father, that I came so late. I think I could have
slain this giant with my fist, had I met him. Then Thor arose, greeted
his son lovingly, saying that he would become great and powerful; and,
added he, I will give you the horse Goldfax, that belonged to Hrungner.
Odin said that Thor did wrong in giving so fine a horse to the son of a
giantess, instead of to his father. Thor went home to Thrudvang, but the
flint-stone still stuck fast in his head. Then came the vala whose name
is Groa, the wife of Orvandel the Bold. She sang her magic songs over
Thor until the flint-stone became loose. But when Thor perceived this,
and was just expecting that the flint-stone would disappear, he desired
to reward Groa for her healing, and make her heart glad. So he related
to her how he had waded from the north over the Elivogs rivers, and had
borne in a basket on his back Orvandel from Jotunheim; and in evidence
of this he told her how that one toe of his had protruded from the
basket and had frozen, wherefore Thor had broken it off and had cast it
up into the sky, and made of it the star which is called Orvandel’s toe.
Finally he added that it would not be long before Orvandel would come
home. But Groa became so glad that she forgot her magic songs, and so
the flint-stone became no looser than it was, and it sticks fast in
Thor’s head yet. For this reason it is forbidden to throw a flint-stone
across the floor, for then the stone in Thor’s head is moved. Out of
this saga Thjodolf of Hvin has made a song:

  We have ample evidence
  Of the giant-terrifier’s[77] journey
  To Grjottungard, to the giant Hrungner,
  In the midst of encircling flames.
  The courage waxed high in Meile’s brother;[78]
  The moon-way trembled
  When Jord’s son[79] went
  To the steel-gloved contest.

  The heavens stood all in flames
  For Uller’s step-father,[80]
  And the earth rocked.
  Svolne’s[81] widow[82] burst asunder
  When the span of goats
  Drew the sublime chariot
  And its divine master
  To the meeting with Hrungner.

  Balder’s brother[83] did not tremble
  Before the greedy fiend of men;
  Mountains quaked and rocks broke;
  The heavens were wrapped in flames.
  Much did the giant
  Get frightened, I learn,
  When his bane man he saw
  Ready to slay him.

  Swiftly the gray shield flew
  ’Neath the heels of the giant.
  So the gods willed it,
  So willed it the valkyries.
  Hrungner the giant,
  Eager for slaughter,
  Needed not long to wait for blows
  From the valiant friend of the hammer.

  The slayer[84] of Bele’s evil race
  Made fall the bear of the loud-roaring mountain;[85]
  On his shield
  Bite the dust
  Must the giant
  Before the sharp-edged hammer,
  When the giant-crusher
  Stood against the mighty Hrungner,

  And the flint-stone
  (So hard to break)
  Of the friend of the troll-women
  Into the skull did whiz
  Of Jord’s son,[86]
  And this flinty piece
  Fast did stick
  In Eindride’s[87] blood;

  Until Orvandel’s wife,
  Magic songs singing,
  From the head of Thor
  Removed the giant’s
  Excellent flint-stone.
  All do I know
  About that shield-journey.
  A shield adorned
  With hues most splendid
  I received from Thorleif.

    [Footnote 77: Thor’s.]

    [Footnote 78: Thor.]

    [Footnote 79: Jord’s (= earth’s) son = Thor.]

    [Footnote 80: Thor.]

    [Footnote 81: Odin’s.]

    [Footnote 82: The earth.]

    [Footnote 83: Thor.]

    [Footnote 84: Thor.]

    [Footnote 85: The giant Hrungner.]

    [Footnote 86: Thor.]

    [Footnote 87: Thor’s.]


THOR’S JOURNEY TO GEIRROD’S.

Then said Æger: Much of a man, it seems to me, was that Hrungner. Has
Thor accomplished any other great deeds in his intercourse with trolls
(giants)? Then answered Brage: It is worth giving a full account of how
Thor made a journey to Geirrodsgard. He had with him neither the hammer
Mjolner, nor his belt of strength, Megingjard, nor his steel gloves; and
that was Loke’s fault,--he was with him. For it had happened to Loke,
when he once flew out to amuse himself in Frigg’s falcon-guise, that he,
out of curiosity, flew into Geirrodsgard, where he saw a large hall. He
sat down and looked in through the window, but Geirrod discovered him,
and ordered the bird to be caught and brought to him. The servant had
hard work to climb up the wall of the hall, so high was it. It amused
Loke that it gave the servant so much trouble to get at him, and he
thought it would be time enough to fly away when he had gotten over the
worst. When the latter now caught at him, Loke spread his wings and
spurned with his feet, but these were fast, and so Loke was caught and
brought to the giant. When the latter saw his eyes he suspected that it
was a man. He put questions to him and bade him answer, but Loke refused
to speak. Then Geirrod locked him down in a chest, and starved him for
three months; and when Geirrod finally took him up again, and asked him
to speak, Loke confessed who he was, and to save his life he swore an
oath to Geirrod that he would get Thor to come to Geirrodsgard without
his hammer or his belt of strength.

On his way Thor visited the giantess whose name is Grid. She was the
mother of Vidar the Silent. She told Thor the truth concerning Geirrod,
that he was a dog-wise and dangerous giant; and she lent him her own
belt of strength and steel gloves, and her staff, which is called
Gridarvol. Then went Thor to the river which is called Vimer, and which
is the largest of all rivers. He buckled on the belt of strength and
stemmed the wild torrent with Gridarvol, but Loke held himself fast in
Megingjard. When Thor had come into the middle of the stream, the river
waxed so greatly that the waves dashed over his shoulders. Then quoth
Thor:

  Wax not Vimer,
  Since I intend to wade
  To the gards of giants.
  Know, if you wax,
  Then waxes my asa-might
  As high, as the heavens.

Then Thor looked up and saw in a cleft Gjalp, the daughter of Geirrod,
standing on both sides of the stream, and causing its growth. Then took
he up out of the river a huge stone and threw at her, saying: At its
source the stream must be stemmed.[88] He was not wont to miss his mark.
At the same time he reached the river bank and got hold of a shrub, and
so he got out of the river. Hence comes the adage that _a shrub saved
Thor_.[89] When Thor came to Geirrod, he and his companion were shown to
the guest-room, where lodgings were given them, but there was but one
seat, and on that Thor sat down. Then he became aware that the seat was
raised under him toward the roof. He put the Gridarvol against the
rafters, and pressed himself down against the seat. Then was heard a
great crash, which was followed by a loud screaming. Under the seat were
Geirrod’s daughters, Gjalp and Greip, and he had broken the backs of
both of them. Then quoth Thor:

  Once I employed
  My asa-might
  In the gards of the giants.
  When Gjalp and Greip,
  Geirrod’s daughters,
  Wanted to lift me to heaven.

    [Footnote 88: Icelandic proverb.]

    [Footnote 89: Icelandic proverb.]

Then Geirrod had Thor invited into the hall to the games. Large fires
burned along the whole length of the hall. When Thor came into the hall,
and stood opposite Geirrod, the latter seized with a pair of tongs a
red-hot iron wedge and threw it at Thor. But he caught it with his steel
gloves, and lifted it up in the air. Geirrod sprang behind an iron post
to guard himself. But Thor threw the wedge with so great force that it
struck through the post, through Geirrod, through the wall, and then
went out and into the ground. From this saga, Eilif, son of Gudrun, made
the following song, called Thor’s Drapa:

  The Midgard-serpent’s father exhorted
  Thor, the victor of giants,
  To set out from home.
  A great liar was Loke.
  Not quite confident,
  The companion of the war-god
  Declared green paths to lie
  To the gard of Geirrod.

  Thor did not long let Loke
  Invite him to the arduous journey.
  They were eager to crush
  Thorn’s descendants.
  When he, who is wont to swing Megingjard,
  Once set out from Odin’s home
  To visit Ymer’s children in Gandvik,

  The giantess Gjalp,
  Perjured Geirrod’s daughter,
  Sooner got ready magic to use
  Than the god of war and Loke.
  A song I recite.
  Those gods noxious to the giants
  Planted their feet
  In Endil’s land,

  And the men wont to battle
  Went forth.
  The message of death
  Came of the moon-devourer’s women,
  When the cunning and wrathful
  Conqueror of Loke
  Challenged to a contest
  The giantess.

  And the troll-woman’s disgracer
  Waded across the roaring stream,--
  Rolling full of drenched snow over its banks.
  He who puts giants to flight
  Rapidly advanced
  O’er the broad watery way,
  Where the noisy stream’s
  Venom belched forth.

  Thor and his companions
  Put before him the staff;
  Thereon he rested
  Whilst over they waded:
  Nor sleep did the stones,--
  The sonorous staff striking the rapid wave
  Made the river-bed ring,--
  The mountain-torrent rang with stones.

  The wearer of Megingjard
  Saw the flood fall
  On his hard-waxed shoulders:
  He could do no better.
  The destroyer of troll-children
  Let his neck-strength
  Wax heaven high,
  Till the mighty stream should diminish.

  But the warriors,
  The oath-bound protectors of Asgard,--
  The experienced vikings,--
  Waded fast and the stream sped on.
  Thou god of the bow!
  The billows
  Blown by the mountain-storm
  Powerfully rushed
  Over Thor’s shoulders.

  Thjalfe and his companion,
  With their heads above water,
  Got over the river,--
  To Thor’s belt they clung.
  Their strength was tested,--
  Geirrod’s daughters made hard the stream
  For the iron rod.
  Angry fared Thor with the Gridarvol.

  Nor did courage fail
  Those foes of the giant
  In the seething vortex.
  Those sworn companions
  Regarded a brave heart
  Better than gold.
  Neither Thor’s nor Thjalfe’s heart
  From fear did tremble.

  And the war companions--
  Weapons despising--
  ’Mong the giants made havoc,
  Until, O woman!
  The giant destroyers
  The conflict of helmets
  With the warlike race
  Did commence.

  The giants of Iva’s[90] capes
  Made a rush with Geirrod;
  The foes of the cold Svithiod
  Took to flight.
  Geirrod’s giants
  Had to succumb
  When the lightning wielder’s[91] kinsmen
  Closely pursued them.

  Wailing was ’mongst the cave-dwellers
  When the giants,
  With warlike spirit endowed,
  Went forward.
  There was war.
  The slayer of troll-women,
  By foes surrounded,
  The giant’s hard head hit.

  With violent pressure
  Were pressed the vast eyes
  Of Gjalp and Greip
  Against the high roof.
  The fire-chariot’s driver
  The old backs broke
  Of both these maids
  For the cave-woman.

  The man of the rocky way
  But scanty knowledge got;
  Nor able were the giants
  To enjoy perfect gladness.
  Thou man of the bow-string!
  The dwarf’s kinsman
  An iron beam, in the forge heated,
  Threw against Odin’s dear son.

  But the battle-hastener,
  Freyja’s old friend,
  With swift hands caught
  In the air the beam
  As it flew from the hands
  Of the father of Greip,--
  His breast with anger swollen
  Against Thruda’s[92] father.

  Geirrod’s hall trembled
  When he struck,
  With his broad head,
  ’Gainst the old column of the house-wall.
  Uller’s splendid flatterer
  Swung the iron beam
  Straight ’gainst the head
  Of the knavish giant.

  The crusher of the hall-wont troll-women
  A splendid victory won
  Over Glam’s descendants;
  With gory hammer fared Thor.
  Gridarvol-staff,
  Which made disaster
  ’Mong Geirrod’s companion,
  Was not used ’gainst that giant himself.

  The much worshiped thunderer,
  With all his might, slew
  The dwellers in Alfheim
  With that little willow-twig,
  And no shield
  Was able to resist
  The strong age-diminisher
  Of the mountain-king.

    [Footnote 90: A river in Jotunheim.]

    [Footnote 91: Thor’s kinsmen = the asas.]

    [Footnote 92: Thruda was a daughter of Thor and Sif.]


IDUN.

How shall Idun be named? She is called the wife of Brage, the keeper of
the apples; but the apples are called the medicine to bar old age
(ellilyf, elixir vitæ). She is also called the booty of the giant
Thjasse, according to what has before been said concerning how he took
her away from the asas. From this saga Thjodolf, of Hvin, composed the
following song in his Haustlong:

  How shall the tongue
  Pay an ample reward
  For the sonorous shield
  Which I received from Thorleif,
  Foremost ’mong soldiers?
  On the splendidly made shield
  I see the unsafe journey
  Of three gods and Thjasse.

  Idun’s robber flew long ago
  The asas to meet
  In the giant’s old eagle-guise.
  The eagle perched
  Where the asas bore
  Their food to be cooked.
  Ye women! The mountain-giant
  Was not wont to be timid.

  Suspected of malice
  Was the giant toward the gods.
  Who causes this?
  Said the chief of the gods.
  The wise-worded giant-eagle
  From the old tree began to speak.
  The friend of Honer
  Was not friendly to him.

  The mountain-wolf from Honer
  Asked for his fill
  From the holy table:
  It fell to Honer to blow the fire.
  The giant, eager to kill,
  Glided down
  Where the unsuspecting gods,
  Odin, Loke and Honer, were sitting.

  The fair lord of the earth
  Bade Farbaute’s son
  Quickly to share
  The ox with the giant;
  But the cunning foe of the asas
  Thereupon laid
  The four parts of the ox
  Upon the broad table.

  And the huge father of Morn[93]
  Afterward greedily ate
  The ox at the tree-root.
  That was long ago,
  Until the profound
  Loke the hard rod laid
  ’Twixt the shoulders
  Of the giant Thjasse.

  Then clung with his hands
  The husband of Sigyn
  To Skade’s foster-son,
  In the presence of all the gods.
  The pole stuck fast
  To Jotunheim’s strong fascinator,
  But the hands of Honer’s dear friend
  Stuck to the other end.

  Flew then with the wise god
  The voracious bird of prey
  Far away; so the wolf’s father
  To pieces must be torn.
  Odin’s friend got exhausted.
  Heavy grew Lopt.
  Odin’s companion
  Must sue for peace.

  Hymer’s kinsman demanded
  That the leader of hosts
  The sorrow-healing maid,
  Who the asas’ youth-preserving apples keeps,
  Should bring to him.
  Brisingamen’s thief
  Afterward brought Idun
  To the gard of the giant.

  Sorry were not the giants
  After this had taken place,
  Since from the south
  Idun had come to the giants.
  All the race
  Of Yngve-Frey, at the Thing,
  Grew old and gray,--
  Ugly-looking were the gods.

  Until the gods found the blood-dog,
  Idun’s decoying thrall,
  And bound the maid’s deceiver,
  You shall, cunning Loke,
  Spake Thor, die;
  Unless back you lead,
  With your tricks, that
  Good joy-increasing maid.

  Heard have I that thereupon
  The friend of Honer flew
  In the guise of a falcon
  (He often deceived the asas with his cunning);
  And the strong fraudulent giant,
  The father of Morn,
  With the wings of the eagle
  Sped after the hawk’s child.

  The holy gods soon built a fire--
  They shaved off kindlings--
  And the giant was scorched.
  This is said in memory
  Of the dwarf’s heel-bridge.[94]
  A shield adorned with splendid lines
  From Thorleif I received.

    [Footnote 93: A troll-woman.]

    [Footnote 94: Shield.]


ÆGER’S FEAST.

How shall gold be named? It may be called fire; the needles of Glaser;
Sif’s hair; Fulla’s head-gear; Freyja’s tears; the chatter, talk or word
of the giants; Draupner’s drop; Draupner’s rain or shower; Freyja’s
eyes; the otter-ransom, or stroke-ransom, of the asas; the seed of
Fyrisvold; Holge’s how-roof; the fire of all waters and of the hand;
or the stone, rock or gleam of the hand.

Why is gold called Æger’s fire? The saga relating to this is, as has
before been told, that Æger made a visit to Asgard, but when he was
ready to return home he invited Odin and all the asas to come and pay
him a visit after the lapse of three months. On this journey went Odin,
Njord, Frey, Tyr, Brage, Vidar, Loke; and also the asynjes, Frigg,
Freyja, Gefjun, Skade, Idun, Sif. Thor was not there, for he had gone
eastward to fight trolls. When the gods had taken their seats, Æger let
his servants bring in on the hall floor bright gold, which shone and
lighted up the whole hall like fire, just as the swords in Valhal are
used instead of fire. Then Loke bandied hasty words with all the gods,
and slew Æger’s thrall who was called Fimafeng. The name of his other
thrall is Elder. The name of Æger’s wife is Ran, and they have nine
daughters, as has before been written. At this feast all things passed
around spontaneously, both food and ale and all the utensils needed for
the feasting. Then the asas became aware that Ran had a net in which she
caught all men who perish at sea. Then the saga goes on telling how it
happens that gold is called the fire, or light or brightness of Æger, of
Ran, or of Æger’s daughters; and from these periphrases it is allowed to
call gold the fire of the sea, or of any of the periphrases of the sea,
since Æger and Ran are found in periphrases of the sea; and thus gold is
now called the fire of waters, of rivers, or of all the periphrases of
rivers. But these names have fared like other periphrases. The younger
skald has composed poetry after the pattern of the old skalds, imitating
their songs; but afterward they have expanded the metaphors whenever
they thought they could improve upon what was sung before; and thus the
water is the sea, the river is the lakes, the brook is the river. Hence
all the figures that are expanded more than what has before been found
are called new tropes, and all seem good that contain likelihood and are
natural. Thus sang the skald Brage:

  From the king I received
  The fire of the brook.
  This the king gave to me
  And a head with song.

Why is gold called the needles or leaves of Glaser? In Asgard, before
the doors of Valhal, stands a grove which is called Glaser, and all its
leaves are of red gold, as is here sung:

  Glaser stands
  With golden leaves
  Before Sigtyr’s halls.

This is the fairest forest among gods and men.


LOKE’S WAGER WITH THE DWARFS.

Why is gold called Sif’s hair? Loke Laufey’s son had once craftily cut
all the hair off Sif; but when Thor found it out he seized Loke, and
would have broken every bone in him, had he not pledged himself with an
oath to get the swarthy elves to make for Sif a hair of gold that should
grow like other hair. Then went Loke to the dwarfs that are called
Ivald’s sons, and they made the hair and Skidbladner, and the spear that
Odin owned and is called Gungner. Thereupon Loke wagered his head with
the dwarf, who hight Brok, that his brother Sindre would not be able to
make three other treasures equally as good as these were. But when they
came to the smithy, Sindre laid a pig-skin in the furnace and requested
Brok to blow the bellows, and not to stop blowing before he (Sindre) had
taken out of the furnace what he had put into it. As soon, however, as
Sindre had gone out of the smithy and Brok was blowing, a fly lighted on
his hand and stung him; but he kept on blowing as before until the smith
had taken the work out of the furnace. That was now a boar, and its
bristles were of gold. Thereupon he laid gold in the furnace, and
requested Brok to blow, and not to stop plying the bellows before he
came back. He went out; but then came the fly and lighted on his neck
and stung him still worse; but he continued to work the bellows until
the smith took out of the furnace the gold ring called Draupner. Then
Sindre placed iron in the furnace, and requested Brok to work the
bellows, adding that otherwise all would be worthless. Now the fly
lighted between his eyes and stung his eye-lids, and as the blood ran
down into his eyes so that he could not see, he let go of the bellows
just for a moment and drove the fly away with his hands. Then the smith
came back and said that all that lay in the furnace came near being
entirely spoiled. Thereupon he took a hammer out of the furnace. All
these treasures he then placed in the hands of his brother Brok, and
bade him go with Loke to Asgard to fetch the wager. When Loke and Brok
brought forth the treasures, the gods seated themselves upon their
doom-steads. It was agreed to abide by the decision which should be
pronounced by Odin, Thor and Frey. Loke gave to Odin the spear Gungner,
to Thor the hair, which Sif was to have, and to Frey, Skidbladner; and
he described the qualities of all these treasures, stating that the
spear never would miss its mark, that the hair would grow as soon as it
was placed on Sif s head, and that Skidbladner would always have fair
wind as soon as the sails were hoisted, no matter where its owner
desired to go; besides, the ship could be folded together like a napkin
and be carried in his pocket if he desired. Then Brok produced his
treasures. He gave to Odin the ring, saying that every ninth night eight
other rings as heavy as it would drop from it; to Frey he gave the boar,
stating that it would run through the air and over seas, by night or by
day, faster than any horse; and never could it become so dark in the
night, or in the worlds of darkness, but that it would be light where
this boar was present, so bright shone his bristles. Then he gave to
Thor the hammer, and said that he might strike with it as hard as he
pleased; no matter what was before him, the hammer would take no scathe,
and wherever he might throw it he would never lose it; it would never
fly so far that it did not return to his hand; and if he desired, it
would become so small that he might conceal it in his bosom; but it had
one fault, which was, that the handle was rather short. The decision of
the gods was, that the hammer was the best of all these treasures and
the greatest protection against the frost-giants, and they declared that
the dwarf had fairly won the wager. Then Loke offered to ransom his
head. The dwarf answered saying there was no hope for him on that score.
Take me, then! said Loke; but when the dwarf was to seize him Loke was
far away, for he had the shoes with which he could run through the air
and over the sea. Then the dwarf requested Thor to seize him, and he did
so. Now the dwarf wanted to cut the head off Loke, but Loke said that
the head was his, but not the neck. Then the dwarf took thread and a
knife and wanted to pierce holes in Loke’s lips, so as to sew his mouth
together, but the knife would not cut. Then said he, it would be better
if he had his brother’s awl, and as soon as he named it the awl was
there and it pierced Loke’s lips. Now Brok sewed Loke’s mouth together,
and broke off the thread at the end of the sewing. The thread with which
the mouth of Loke was sewed together is called Vartare (a strap).


THE NIFLUNGS AND GJUKUNGS.

The following is the reason why gold is called otter-ransom: It is
related that three asas went abroad to learn to know the whole world,
Odin, Honer and Loke. They came to a river, and walked along the
river-bank to a force, and near the force was an otter. The otter had
caught a salmon in the force, and sat eating it with his eyes closed.
Loke picked up a stone, threw it at the otter and hit him in the head.
Loke bragged of his chase, for he had secured an otter and a salmon with
one throw. They took the salmon and the otter with them, and came to a
byre, where they entered. But the name of the bonde who lived there was
Hreidmar. He was a mighty man, and thoroughly skilled in the black art.
The asas asked for night-lodgings, stating that they had plenty of food,
and showed the bonde their game. But when Hreidmar saw the otter he
called his sons, Fafner and Regin, and said that Otter, their brother,
was slain, and also told who had done it. Then the father and the sons
attacked the asas, seized them and bound them, and then said, in
reference to the otter, that he was Hreidmar’s son. The asas offered,
as a ransom for their lives, as much money as Hreidmar himself might
demand, and this was agreed to, and confirmed with an oath. Then the
otter was flayed. Hreidmar took the otter-belg and said to them that
they should fill the belg with red gold, and then cover it with the same
metal, and when this was done they should be set free. Thereupon Odin
sent Loke to the home of the swarthy elves, and he came to the dwarf
whose name is Andvare, and who lived as a fish, in the water. Loke
caught him in his hands, and demanded of him, as a ransom for his life,
all the gold that he had in his rock. And when they entered the rock,
the dwarf produced all the gold that he owned, and that was a very large
amount. Then the dwarf concealed in his hand a small gold ring. Loke saw
this, and requested him to hand forth the ring. The dwarf begged him not
to take the ring away from him, for with this ring he could increase his
wealth again if he kept it. Loke said the dwarf should not keep as much
as a penny, took the ring from him and went out. But the dwarf said that
that ring should be the bane of every one who possessed it. Loke replied
that he was glad of this, and said that all should be fulfilled
according to his prophecy: he would take care to bring the curse to the
ears of him who was to receive it. He went to Hreidmar and showed Odin
the gold; but when the latter saw the ring, it seemed to him a fair one,
and he took it and put it aside, giving Hreidmar the rest of the gold.
They filled the otter-belg as full as it would hold, and raised it up
when it was full. Then came Odin, and was to cover the belg with gold;
and when this was done, he requested Hreidmar to come and see whether
the belg was sufficiently covered. But Hreidmar looked at it, examined
it closely, and saw a mouth-hair, and demanded that it should be
covered, too, otherwise the agreement would be broken. Then Odin brought
forth the ring and covered with it the mouth-hair, saying that now they
had paid the otter-ransom. But when Odin had taken his spear, and Loke
his shoes, so that they had nothing more to fear, Loke said that the
curse that Andvare had pronounced should be fulfilled, and that the ring
and that gold should be the bane of its possessor; and this curse was
afterward fulfilled. This explains why gold is called the otter-ransom,
or forced payment of the asas, or strife-metal.

What more is there to be told of this gold? Hreidmar accepted the gold
as a ransom for his son, but Fafner and Regin demanded their share of it
as a ransom for their brother. Hreidmar was, however, unwilling to give
them as much as a penny of it. Then the brothers made an agreement to
kill their father for the sake of the gold. When this was done, Regin
demanded that Fafner should give him one half of it. Fafner answered
that there was but little hope that he would share the gold with his
brother, since he had himself slain his father to obtain it; and he
commanded Regin to get him gone, for else the same thing would happen to
him as had happened to Hreidmar. Fafner had taken the sword hight
Hrotte, and the helmet which had belonged to his father, and the latter
he had placed on his head. This was called the Æger’s helmet, and it was
a terror to all living to behold it. Regin had the sword called Refil.
With it he fled. But Fafner went to Gnita-heath (the glittering heath),
where he made himself a bed, took on him the likeness of a serpent
(dragon), and lay brooding over the gold.

Regin then went to Thjode, to king Hjalprek, and became his smith. There
he undertook the fostering of Sigurd (Sigfrid), the son of Sigmund, the
son of Volsung and the son of Hjordis, the daughter of Eylime. Sigurd
was the mightiest of all the kings of hosts, in respect to both family
and power and mind. Regin explained to him where Fafner was lying on the
gold, and egged him on to try to get possession thereof. Then Regin made
the sword which is hight Gram (wrath), and which was so sharp that when
Sigurd held it in the flowing stream it cut asunder a tuft of wool which
the current carried down against the sword’s edge. In the next place,
Sigurd cut with his sword Regin’s anvil in twain. Thereupon Sigurd and
Regin repaired to Gnita-heath. Here Sigurd dug a ditch in Fafner’s path
and sat down in it; so when Fafner crept to the water and came directly
over this ditch, Sigurd pierced him with the sword, and this thrust
caused his death. Then Regin came and declared that Sigurd had slain his
brother, and demanded of him as a ransom that he should cut out Fafner’s
heart and roast it on the fire; but Regin kneeled down, drank Fafner’s
blood, and laid himself down to sleep. While Sigurd was roasting the
heart, and thought that it must be done, he touched it with his finger
to see how tender it was; but the fat oozed out of the heart and onto
his finger and burnt it, so that he thrust his finger into his mouth.
The heart-blood came in contact with his tongue, which made him
comprehend the speech of birds, and he understood what the eagles said
that were sitting in the trees. One of the birds said:

  There sits Sigurd,
  Stained with blood.
  On the fire is roasting
  Fafner’s heart.
  Wise seemed to me
  The ring-destroyer,
  If he the shining
  Heart would eat.

Another eagle sang:

  There lies Regin,
  Contemplating
  How to deceive the man
  Who trusts him;
  Thinks in his wrath
  Of false accusations.
  The evil smith plots
  Revenge ’gainst the brother.[95]

    [Footnote 95: Elder Edda: the Lay of Fafner, 32, 33.]

Then Sigurd went to Regin and slew him, and thereupon he mounted his
horse hight Grane, and rode until he came to Fafner’s bed, took out all
the gold, packed it in two bags and laid it on Grane’s back, then got on
himself and rode away. Now is told the saga according to which gold is
called Fafner’s bed or lair, the metal of Gnita-heath, or Grane’s
burden.

Then Sigurd rode on until he found a house on the mountain. In it slept
a woman clad in helmet and coat-of-mail. He drew his sword and cut the
coat-of-mail off from her. Then she awaked and called herself Hild. Her
name was Brynhild, and she was a valkyrie. Thence Sigurd rode on and
came to the king whose name was Gjuke. His wife was called Grimhild, and
their children were Gunnar, Hogne, Gudrun, Gudny; Gothorm was Gjuke’s
step-son. Here Sigurd remained a long time. Then he got the hand of
Gudrun, Gjuke’s daughter, and Gunnar and Hogne entered into a sworn
brotherhood with Sigurd. Afterward Sigurd and the sons of Gjuke went to
Atle, Budle’s son, to ask for his sister, Brynhild, for Gunnar’s wife.
She sat on Hindfell, and her hall was surrounded by the bickering flame
called the Vafurloge, and she had made a solemn promise not to wed any
other man than him who dared to ride through the bickering flame. Then
Sigurd and the Gjukungs (they are also called Niflungs) rode upon the
mountain, and there Gunnar was to ride through the Vafurloge. He had the
horse that was called Gote, but this horse did not dare to run into the
flame. So Sigurd and Gunnar changed form and weapons, for Grane would
not take a step under any other man than Sigurd. Then Sigurd mounted
Grane and rode through the bickering flame. That same evening he held a
wedding with Brynhild; but when they went to bed he drew his sword Gram
from the sheath and placed it between them. In the morning when he had
arisen, and had donned his clothes, he gave to Brynhild, as a bridal
gift, the gold ring that Loke had taken from Andvare, and he received
another ring as a memento from her. Then Sigurd mounted his horse and
rode to his companions. He and Gunnar exchanged forms again and went
back to Gjuke with Brynhild. Sigurd had two children with Gudrun. Their
names were Sigmund and Swanhild.

Once it happened that Brynhild and Gudrun went to the water to wash
their hair. When they came to the river Brynhild waded from the river
bank into the stream, and said that she could not bear to have that
water in her hair that ran from Gudrun’s hair, for she had a more
high-minded husband. Then Gudrun followed her into the stream, and said
that she was entitled to wash her hair farther up the stream than
Brynhild, for the reason that she had the husband who was bolder than
Gunnar, or any other man in the world; for it was he who slew Fafner and
Regin, and inherited the wealth of both. Then answered Brynhild: A
greater deed it was that Gunnar rode through the Vafurloge, which Sigurd
did not dare to do. Then laughed Gudrun and said: Do you think it was
Gunnar who rode through the bickering flame? Then I think you shared the
bed with him who gave me this gold ring. The gold ring which you have on
your finger, and which you received as a bridal-gift, is called
Andvaranaut (Andvare’s Gift), and I do not think Gunnar got it on
Gnita-heath. Then Brynhild became silent and went home. Thereupon she
egged Gunnar and Hogne to kill Sigurd; but being sworn brothers of
Sigurd, they egged Guthorm, their brother, to slay Sigurd. Guthorm
pierced him with his sword while he was sleeping; but as soon as Sigurd
was wounded he threw his sword, Gram, after Guthorm, so that it cut him
in twain through the middle. There Sigurd fell, and his son, three
winters old, by name Sigmund, whom they also killed. Then Brynhild
pierced herself with the sword and was cremated with Sigurd. But Gunnar
and Hogne inherited Fafner’s gold and the Gift of Andvare, and now ruled
the lands.

King Atle, Budle’s son, Brynhild’s brother, then got in marriage Gudrun,
who had been Sigurd’s wife, and they had children. King Atle invited
Gunnar and Hogne to visit him, and they accepted his invitation. But
before they started on their journey they concealed Fafner’s hoard in
the Rhine, and that gold has never since been found. King Atle had
gathered together an army and fought a battle with Gunnar and Hogne, and
they were captured. Atle had the heart cut out of Hogne alive. This was
his death. Gunnar he threw into a den of snakes, but a harp was secretly
brought to him, and he played the harp with his toes (for his hands were
fettered), so that all the snakes fell asleep excepting the adder, which
rushed at him and bit him in the breast, and then thrust its head into
the wound and clung to his liver until he died. Gunnar and Hogne are
called Niflungs (Niblungs) and Gjukungs. Hence gold is called the
Niflung treasure or inheritance. A little later Gudrun slew her two sons
and made from their skulls goblets trimmed with gold, and thereupon the
funeral ceremonies took place. At the feast, Gudrun poured for King Atle
in these goblets mead that was mixed with the blood of the youths. Their
hearts she roasted and gave to the king to eat. When this was done she
told him all about it, with many unkind words. There was no lack of
strong mead, so that the most of the people sitting there fell asleep.
On that night she went to the king when he had fallen asleep, and had
with her her son Hogne. They slew him, and thus he ended his life. Then
they set fire to the hall, and with it all the people who were in it
were burned. Then she went to the sea and sprang into the water to drown
herself; but she was carried across the fjord, and came to the land
which belonged to King Jonaker. When he saw her he took her home and
made her his wife. They had three children, whose names were Sorle,
Hamder and Erp. They all had hair as black as ravens, like Gunnar and
Hogne and the other Niflungs.

There was fostered Swanhild, the daughter of Sigurd, and she was the
fairest of all women. That Jormunrek, the rich, found out. He sent his
son, Randver, to ask for her hand for him; and when he came to Jonaker,
Swanhild was delivered to him, so that he might bring her to King
Jormunrek. Then said Bikke that it would be more fitting that Randver
should marry Swanhild, he being young and she too, but Jormunrek being
old. This plan pleased the two young people well. Soon afterward Bikke
informed the king of it, and so King Jormunrek seized his son and had
him brought to the gallows. Then Randver took his hawk, plucked the
feathers off him, and requested that it should be sent to his father,
whereupon he was hanged. But when King Jormunrek saw the hawk, it came
to his mind that as the hawk was flightless and featherless, so his
kingdom was without preservation; for he was old and sonless. Then King
Jormunrek riding out of the woods from the chase with his courtiers,
while Queen Swanhild sat dressing her hair, had the courtiers ride onto
her, and she was trampled to death beneath the feet of the horses. When
Gudrun heard of this, she begged her sons to avenge Swanhild. While they
were busking themselves for the journey, she brought them byrnies and
helmets, so strong that iron could not scathe them. She laid the plan
for them, that when they came to King Jormunrek, they should attack him
in the night whilst he was sleeping. Sorle and Hamder should cut off his
hands and feet, and Erp his head. On the way they asked Erp what
assistance they were to get from him, when they came to King Jormunrek.
He answered them that he would give them such assistance as the hand
gives the foot. They said that the feet got no support from the hands
whatsoever. They were angry at their mother, because she had forced them
to undertake this journey with harsh words, and hence they were going to
do that which would displease her most. So they killed Erp, for she
loved him the most. A little later, while Sorle was walking, he slipped
with one foot, and in falling supported himself with his hands. Then
said he: Now the hands helped the foot; better were it now if Erp were
living. When they came to Jormunrek, the king, in the night, while he
was sleeping, they cut off both his hands and his feet. Then he awaked,
called his men and bade them arise. Said Hamder then: The head would now
have been off had Erp lived. The courtiers got up, attacked them, but
could not overcome them with weapons. Then Jormunrek cried to them that
they should stone them to death. This was done, Sorle and Hamder fell,
and thus perished the last descendants of Gjuke.

After King Sigurd lived a daughter hight Aslaug, who was fostered at
Heimer’s in Hlymdaler. From her mighty races are descended. It is said
that Sigmund, the son of Volsung, was so powerful, that he drank venom
and received no harm therefrom. But Sinfjotle, his son, and Sigurd, were
so hard-skinned that no venom coming onto them could harm them.
Therefore the skald Brage has sung as follows:

  When the tortuous serpent,
  Full of the drink of the Volsungs,[96]
  Hung in coils
  On the bait of the giant-slayer,[97]

Upon these sagas very many skalds have made lays, and from them they
have taken various themes. Brage the Old made the following song about
the fall of Sorle and Hamder in the drapa, which he composed about
Ragnar Lodbrok:

  Jormunrek once,
  In an evil dream, waked
  In that sword-contest
  Against the blood-stained kings.
  A clashing of arms was heard
  In the house of Randver’s father,
  When the raven-blue brothers of Erp
  The insult avenged.

  Sword-dew flowed
  Off the bed on the floor.
  Bloody hands and feet of the king
  One saw cut off.
  On his head fell Jormunrek,
  Frothing in blood.
  On the shield
  This is painted.

  The king saw
  Men so stand
  That a ring they made
  ’Round his house.
  Sorle and Hamder
  Were both at once,
  With slippery stones,
  Struck to the ground.

  King Jormunrek
  Ordered Gjuke’s descendants
  Violently to be stoned
  When they came to take the life
  Of Swanhild’s husband.
  All sought to pay
  Jonaker’s sons
  With blows and wounds.

  This fall of men
  And sagas many
  On the fair shield I see.
  Ragnar gave me the shield.

    [Footnote 96: The drink of the Volsungs = venom; the tortuous
    venom-serpent = the Midgard-serpent.]

    [Footnote 97: Thor.]


MENJA AND FENJA.

Why is gold called Frode’s meal? The saga giving rise to this is the
following:

Odin had a son by name Skjold, from whom the Skjoldungs are descended.
He had his throne and ruled in the lands that are now called Denmark,
but were then called Gotland. Skjold had a son by name Fridleif, who
ruled the lands after him. Fridleif’s son was Frode. He took the kingdom
after his father, at the time when the Emperor Augustus established
peace in all the earth and Christ was born. But Frode being the
mightiest king in the northlands, this peace was attributed to him by
all who spake the Danish tongue, and the Norsemen called it the peace of
Frode. No man injured the other, even though he might meet, loose or in
chains, his father’s or brother’s bane. There was no thief or robber,
so that a gold ring would be a long time on Jalanger’s heath. King Frode
sent messengers to Svithjod, to the king whose name was Fjolner, and
bought there two maid-servants, whose names were Fenja and Menja. They
were large and strong. About this time were found in Denmark two
mill-stones, so large that no one had the strength to turn them. But the
nature belonged to these mill-stones that they ground whatever was
demanded of them by the miller. The name of this mill was Grotte. But
the man to whom King Frode gave the mill was called Hengekjapt. King
Frode had the maid-servants led to the mill, and requested them to grind
for him gold and peace, and Frode’s happiness. Then he gave them no
longer time to rest or sleep than while the cuckoo was silent or while
they sang a song. It is said that they sang the song called the
Grottesong, and before they ended it they ground out a host against
Frode; so that on the same night there came the sea-king, whose name was
Mysing, and slew Frode and took a large amount of booty. Therewith the
Frode-peace ended. Mysing took with him Grotte, and also Fenja and
Menja, and bade them grind salt, and in the middle of the night they
asked Mysing whether he did not have salt enough. He bade them grind
more. They ground only a short time longer before the ship sank. But in
the ocean arose a whirlpool (Maelstrom, mill-stream) in the place where
the sea runs into the mill-eye. Thus the sea became salt.


THE GROTTESONG.

  Now are come
  To the house of the king
  The prescient two,
  Fenja and Menja.
  There must the mighty
  Maidens toil
  For King Frode,
  Fridleif’s son.

  Brought to the mill
  Soon they were;
  The gray stones
  They had to turn.
  Nor rest nor peace
  He gave to them:
  He would hear the maidens
  Turn the mill.

  They turned the mill,
  The prattling stones
  The mill ever rattling.
  What a noise it made!
  Lay the planks!
  Lift the stones![98]
  But he[99] bade the maids
  Yet more to grind.

  They sang and swung
  The swift mill-stone,
  So that Frode’s folk
  Fell asleep.
  Then, when she came
  To the mill to grind,
  With a hard heart
  And with loud voice
  Did Menja sing:

  We grind for Frode
  Wealth and happiness,
  And gold abundant
  On the mill of luck.
  Dance on roses!
  Sleep on down!
  Wake when you please!
  That is well ground.

  Here shall no one
  Hurt the other,
  Nor in ambush lie,
  Nor seek to kill;
  Nor shall any one
  With sharp sword hew,
  Though bound he should find
  His brother’s bane.

  They stood in the hall,
  Their hands were resting;
  Then was it the first
  Word that he spoke:
  Sleep not longer
  Than the cuckoo on the hall,
  Or only while
  A song I sing:

  Frode! you were not
  Wary enough,--
  You friend of men,--
  When maids you bought!
  At their strength you looked,
  And at their fair faces,
  But you asked no questions
  About their descent.

  Hard was Hrungner
  And his father;
  Yet was Thjasse
  Stronger than they,
  And Ide and Orner,
  Our friends, and
  The mountain-giants’ brothers,
  Who fostered us two.

  Not would Grotte have come
  From the mountain gray,
  Nor this hard stone
  Out from the earth;
  The maids of the mountain-giants
  Would not thus be grinding
  If we two knew
  Nothing of the mill.

  Through winters nine
  Our strength increased,
  While below the sod
  We played together.
  Great deeds were the maids
  Able to perform;
  Mountains they
  From their places moved.

  The stone we rolled
  From the giants’ dwelling,
  So that all the earth
  Did rock and quake.
  So we hurled
  The rattling stone,
  The heavy block,
  That men caught it.

  In Svithjod’s land
  Afterward we
  Fire-wise women,
  Fared to the battle,
  Byrnies we burst,
  Shields we cleaved,
  Made our way
  Through gray-clad hosts.

  One chief we slew,
  Another we aided,--
  To Guthorm the Good
  Help we gave.
  Ere Knue had fallen
  Nor rest we got.
  Then bound we were
  And taken prisoners.

  Such were our deeds
  In former days,
  That we heroes brave
  Were thought to be.
  With spears sharp
  Heroes we pierced,
  So the gore did run
  And our swords grew red.

  Now we are come
  To the house of the king,
  No one us pities.
  Bond-women are we.
  Dirt eats our feet,
  Our limbs are cold,
  The peace-giver[100] we turn.
  Hard it is at Frode’s.

  The hands shall stop,
  The stone shall stand;
  Now have I ground
  For my part enough.
  Yet to the hands
  No rest must be given,
  ’Till Frode thinks
  Enough has been ground.

  Now hold shall the hands
  The lances hard,
  The weapons bloody,--
  Wake now, Frode!
  Wake now, Frode!
  If you would listen
  To our songs,--
  To sayings old.

  Fire I see burn
  East of the burg,--
  The warnews are awake.
  That is called warning.
  A host hither
  Hastily approaches
  To burn the king’s
  Lofty dwelling.

  No longer you will sit
  On the throne of Hleidra
  And rule o’er red
  Rings and the mill.
  Now must we grind
  With all our might,
  No warmth will we get
  From the blood of the slain.

  Now my father’s daughter
  Bravely turns the mill.
  The death of many
  Men she sees.
  Now broke the large
  Braces ’neath the mill,--
  The iron-bound braces.
  Let us yet grind!

  Let us yet grind!
  Yrsa’s son
  Shall on Frode revenge
  Halfdan’s death.
  He shall Yrsa’s
  Offspring be named,
  And yet Yrsa’s brother.
  Both of us know it.

  The mill turned the maidens,--
  Their might they tested;
  Young they were,
  And giantesses wild.
  The braces trembled.
  Then fell the mill,--
  In twain was broken
  The heavy stone.

  All the old world
  Shook and trembled,
  But the giant’s maid
  Speedily said:
  We have turned the mill, Frode!
  Now we may stop.
  By the mill long enough
  The maidens have stood.

    [Footnote 98: These words are spoken by the maidens while they put
    the mill together.]

    [Footnote 99: Frode.]

    [Footnote 100: The mill.]


ROLF KRAKE.

A king in Denmark hight Rolf Krake, and was the most famous of all kings
of olden times; moreover, he was more mild, brave and condescending than
all other men. A proof of his condescension, which is very often spoken
of in olden stories, was the following: There was a poor little fellow
by name Vog. He once came into King Rolf’s hall while the king was yet a
young man, and of rather delicate growth. Then Vog went before him and
looked up at him. Then said the king: What do you mean to say, my
fellow, by looking so at me? Answered Vog: When I was at home I heard
people say that King Rolf, at Hleidra, was the greatest man in the
northlands, but now sits here in the high-seat a little crow (krake),
and it they call their king. Then made answer the king: You, my fellow,
have given me a name, and I shall henceforth be called Rolf Krake, but
it is customary that a gift accompanies the name. Seeing that you have
no gift that you can give me with the name, or that would be suitable to
me, then he who has must give to the other. Then he took a gold ring off
his hand and gave it to the churl. Then said Vog: You give as the best
king of all, and therefore I now pledge myself to become the bane of him
who becomes your bane. Said the king, laughing: A small thing makes Vog
happy.

Another example is told of Rolf Krake’s bravery. In Upsala reigned a
king by name Adils, whose wife was Yrsa, Rolf Krake’s mother. He was
engaged in a war with Norway’s king, Ale. They fought a battle on the
ice of the lake called Wenern. King Adils sent a message to Rolf Krake,
his stepson, asking him to come and help him, and promising to furnish
pay for his whole army during the campaign. Furthermore King Rolf
himself should have any three treasures that he might choose in Sweden.
But Rolf Krake could not go to his assistance, on account of the war
which he was then waging against the Saxons. Still he sent twelve
berserks to King Adils. Among them were Bodvar Bjarke, Hjalte the
Valiant, Hvitserk the Keen, Vot, Vidsete, and the brothers Svipday and
Beigud. In that war fell King Ale and a large part of his army. Then
King Adils took from the dead King Ale the helmet called Hildesvin, and
his horse called Rafn. Then the berserks each demanded three pounds of
gold in pay for their service, and also asked for the treasures which
they had chosen for Rolf Krake, and which they now desired to bring to
him. These were the helmet Hildegolt; the byrnie Finnsleif, which no
steel could scathe; and the gold ring called Sviagris, which had
belonged to Adils’ forefathers. But the king refused to surrender any of
these treasures, nor did he give the berserks any pay. The berserks then
returned home, and were much dissatisfied. They reported all to King
Rolf, who straightway busked himself to fare against Upsala; and when he
came with his ships into the river Fyre, he rode against Upsala, and
with him his twelve berserks, all peaceless. Yrsa, his mother, received
him and took him to his lodgings, but not to the king’s hall. Large
fires were kindled for them, and ale was brought them to drink. Then
came King Adils’ men in and bore fuel onto the fireplace, and made a
fire so great that it burnt the clothes of Rolf and his berserks,
saying: Is it true that neither fire nor steel will put Rolf Krake and
his berserks to flight? Then Rolf Krake and all his men sprang up, and
he said:

  Let us increase the blaze
  In Adils’ chambers.

He took his shield and cast it into the fire, and sprang over the fire
while the shield was burning, and cried:

  From the fire flees not he
  Who over it leaps.

The same did also his men, one after the other, and then they took those
who had put fuel on the fire and cast them into it. Now Yrsa came and
handed Rolf Krake a deer’s horn full of gold, and with it she gave him
the ring Sviagris, and requested them to ride straightway to their army.
They sprang upon their horses and rode away over the Fyrisvold. Then
they saw that King Adils was riding after them with his whole army, all
armed, and was going to slay them. Rolf Krake took gold out of the horn
with his right hand, and scattered it over the whole way. But when the
Swedes saw it they leaped out of their saddles, and each one took as
much as he could. King Adils bade them ride, and he himself rode on with
all his might. The name of his horse was Slungner, the fastest of all
horses. When Rolf Krake saw that King Adils was riding near him, he took
the ring Sviagris and threw it to him, asking him to take it as a gift.
King Adils rode to the ring, picked it up with the end of his spear, and
let it slide down to his hand. Then Rolf Krake turned round and saw that
the other was stooping. Said he: Like a swine I have now bended the
foremost of all Swedes. Thus they parted. Hence gold is called the seed
of Krake or of Fyrisvold.


HOGNE AND HILD.

A king by name Hogne had a daughter by name Hild. Her a king, by name
Hedin, son of Hjarrande, made a prisoner of war, while King Hogne had
fared to the trysting of the kings. But when he learned that there had
been harrying in his kingdom, and that his daughter had been taken away,
he rode with his army in search of Hedin, and learned that he had sailed
northward along the coast. When King Hogne came to Norway, he found out
that Hedin had sailed westward into the sea. Then Hogne sailed after him
to the Orkneys. And when he came to the island called Ha, then Hedin was
there before him with his host. Then Hild went to meet her father, and
offered him as a reconciliation from Hedin a necklace; but if he was not
willing to accept this, she said that Hedin was prepared for a battle,
and Hogne might expect no clemency from him. Hogne answered his daughter
harshly. When she returned to Hedin, she told him that Hogne would not
be reconciled, and bade him busk himself for the battle. And so both
parties did; they landed on the island and marshaled their hosts. Then
Hedin called to Hogne, his father-in-law, offering him a reconciliation
and much gold as a ransom. Hogne answered: Too late do you offer to make
peace with me, for now I have drawn the sword Dainsleif, which was
smithied by the dwarfs, and must be the death of a man whenever it is
drawn; its blows never miss the mark, and the wounds made by it never
heal. Said Hedin: You boast the sword, but not the victory. That I call
a good sword that is always faithful to its master. Then they began the
battle which is called the Hjadninga-vig (the slaying of the
Hedin_ians_); they fought the whole day, and in the evening the kings
fared back to their ships. But in the night Hild went to the
battlefield, and waked up with sorcery all the dead that had fallen. The
next day the kings went to the battlefield and fought, and so did also
all they who had fallen the day before. Thus the battle continued from
day to day; and all they who fell, and all the swords that lay on the
field of battle, and all the shields, became stone. But as soon as day
dawned all the dead arose again and fought, and all the weapons became
new again, and in songs it is said that the Hjadnings will so continue
until Ragnarok.




NOTES.


ENEA.

The Enea mentioned in the Foreword to Gylfe’s Fooling refers to the
settlement of western Europe, where Æneas is said to have founded a city
on the Tiber. Bergmann, however, in his Fascination de Gulfi, page 28,
refers it to the Thracian town Ainos.


HERIKON.

Herikon is undoubtedly a mutilated form for Erichthonios. The genealogy
here given corresponds with the one given in the Iliad, Book 20, 215.


THE HISTORICAL ODIN.

The historical or anthropomorphized Odin, described in the Foreword to
the Fooling of Gylfe, becomes interesting when we compare it with
Snorre’s account of that hero in Heimskringla, and then compare both
accounts with the Roman traditions about Æneas. Of course the whole
story is only a myth; but we should remember that in the minds and
hearts of our ancestors it served every purpose of genuine history. Our
fathers accepted it in as good faith as any Christian ever believed in
the gospel of Christ, and so it had a similar influence in moulding the
social, religious, political and literary life of our ancestors. We
become interested in this legend as much as if it were genuine history,
on account of the influence it wielded upon the minds and hearts of a
race destined to act so great a part in the social, religious and
political drama of Europe. We look into this and other ancestral myths,
and see mirrored in them all that we afterward find to be reliable
history of the old Teutons. In the same manner we are interested in the
story told about Romulus and Remus, about Mars and the wolf. This Roman
myth is equally prophetic in reference to the future career of Rome. The
warlike Mars, the rapacity of the wolf, and the fratricide Romulus, form
a mirror in which we see reflected the whole historical development of
the Romans; so that the story of Romulus is a vest-pocket edition of the
history of Rome.

There are many points of resemblance between this old story of Odin and
the account that Virgil gives us of Æneas, the founder of the Latin
race; and it is believed that, while Virgil imitated Homer, he based his
poem upon a legend current among his countrymen. The Greeks in Virgil’s
poem are Pompey and the Romans in our Teutonic story. The Trojans
correspond to Mithridates and his allies. Æneas and Odin are identical.
Just as Odin, a heroic defender of Mithridates, after traversing various
unknown countries, finally reaches the north of Europe, organizes the
various Teutonic kingdoms, settles his sons upon the thrones of Germany,
England, Denmark, Sweden and Norway, and instructs his people to gather
strength and courage, so as eventually to take revenge on the cursed
Romans; so Æneas, one of the most valiant defenders of Troy, after many
adventures in various lands, at length settles in Italy, and becomes the
founder of a race that in course of time is to wreak vengeance upon the
Greeks. The prophecy contained in the Roman legend was fulfilled by
Metellus and Mummius, in the years 147 and 146 before Christ, when the
Romans became the conquerors of Greece. The prophecy contained in our
Teutonic legend foreshadowed with no less unrelenting necessity the
downfall of proud Rome, when the Teutonic commander Odoacer, in the year
476 after Christ, dethroned, not Romulus, brother of Remus, but Romulus
Augustulus, son of Orestes. Thus history repeats itself. Roman history
begins and ends with Romulus; and we fancy we can see some connection
between Od-in and Od-oacer. “As the twig is bent the tree is inclined.”

It might be interesting to institute a similar comparison between our
Teutonic race-founder Odin and Ulysses, king of Ithaca, but the reader
will have to do this for himself.

In one respect our heroes differ. The fall of Troy and the wanderings of
Ulysses became the theme of two great epic poems among the Greeks. The
wanderings and adventures of Æneas, son of Anchises, were fashioned into
a lordly epic by Virgil for the Romans. But the much-traveled man, the
ἀνὴρ πολύτροπος, the weapons and the hero, Odin, who, driven by the
norns, first came to Teutondom and to the Baltic shores, has not yet
been sung. This wonderful expedition of our race-founder, which, by
giving a historic cause to all the later hostilities and conflicts
between the Teutons and the Romans, might, as suggested by Gibbon,
supply the noble ground-work of an epic poem as thrilling as the Æneid
of Virgil, has not yet been woven into a song for our race, and we give
our readers this full account of Odin from the Heimskringla in
connection with the Foreword to Gylfe’s Fooling, with the hope that
among our readers there may be found some descendant of Odin, whose
skaldic wings are but just fledged for the flights he hopes to take,
who will take a draught, first from Mimer’s gushing fountain, then from
Suttung’s mead, brought by Odin to Asgard, and consecrate himself and
his talents to this legend with all the ardor of his soul. For, as
William Morris so beautifully says of the Volsung Saga, this is the
great story of the Teutonic race, and should be to us what the tale of
Troy was to the Greeks, and what the tale of Æneas was to the Romans,
to all our race first and afterward, when the evolution of the world has
made the Teutonic race nothing more than a name of what it has been; a
story, too, then, should it be to the races that come after us, no less
than the Iliad, and the Odyssey and the Æneid have been to us.[101] We
sincerely trust that we shall see Odin wrought into a Teutonic epic,
that will present in grand outline the contrast between the Roman and
the Teuton. And now we are prepared to give the Heimskringla account of
the historical Odin. We have adopted Samuel Laing’s translation, with a
few verbal alterations where such seemed necessary.

    [Footnote 101: Quoted from memory.]

It is said that the earth’s circle (Heimskringla), which the human race
inhabits, is torn across into many bights, so that great seas run into
the land from the out-ocean. Thus it is known that a great sea goes into
Njorvasound,[102] and up to the land of Jerusalem. From the same sea a
long sea-bight stretches toward the northeast, and is called the Black
Sea, and divides the three parts of the earth; of which the eastern part
is called Asia, and the western is called by some Europe, by some
Enea.[103] Northward of the Black Sea lies Svithjod the Great,[104] or
the Cold. The Great Svithjod is reckoned by some not less than the
Saracens’ land,[105] others compare it to the Great Blueland.[106] The
northern part of Svithjod lies uninhabited on account of frost and cold,
as likewise the southern parts of Blueland are waste from the burning
sun. In Svithjod are many great domains, and many wonderful races of
men, and many kinds of languages. There are giants,[107] and there are
dwarfs,[108] and there are also blue men.[109] There are wild beasts and
dreadfully large dragons. On the north side of the mountains, which lie
outside of all inhabited lands, runs a river through Svithjod, which is
properly called by the name of Tanais,[110] but was formerly called
Tanaquisl or Vanaquisl, and which falls into the ocean at the Black Sea.
The country of the people on the Vanaquisl was called Vanaland or
Vanaheim, and the river separates the three parts of the world, of which
the easternmost is called Asia and the westernmost Europe.

    [Footnote 102: Njorvasound, the Straits of Gibraltar; so called
    from the first Norseman who sailed through them. His name was
    Njorve. See Ann. for nordisk Oldkyndighed, Vol. I, p. 58.]

    [Footnote 103: See note, page 221.]

      [Transcriber’s Note:
      The reference is to the first “Note”, on Enea.]

    [Footnote 104: Svithjod the Great, or the Cold, is the ancient
    Sarmatia and Scythia Magna, and formed the great part of the
    present European Russia. In the mythological sagas it is also
    called Godheim; that is, the home of Odin and the other gods.
    Svithjod the Less is Sweden proper, and is called Mannheim; that
    is, the home of the kings, the descendants of the gods.]

    [Footnote 105: The Saracens’ land (Serkland) means North Africa
    and Spain, and the Saracen countries in Asia; that is, Persia,
    Assyria, etc.]

    [Footnote 106: Blueland, the country of the blacks in Africa, the
    country south of Serkland, the modern Ethiopia.]

    [Footnote 107: Tartareans.]

    [Footnote 108: Kalmuks.]

    [Footnote 109: Mongolians.]

    [Footnote 110: The Tanais is the present Don river, which empties
    into the Sea of Asov.]

The country east of the Tanaquisl in Asia was called Asaland or Asaheim,
and the chief city in that land was called Asgard.[111] In that city was
a chief called Odin, and it was a great place for sacrifice. It was the
custom there that twelve temple-priests[112] should both direct the
sacrifices and also judge the people. They were called priests or
masters, and all the people served and obeyed them. Odin was a great and
very far-traveled warrior, who conquered many kingdoms, and so
successful was he that in every battle the victory was on his side.
It was the belief of his people that victory belonged to him in every
battle. It was his custom when he sent his men into battle, or on any
expedition, that he first laid his hand upon their heads, and called
down a blessing upon them; and then they believed their undertaking
would be successful. His people also were accustomed, whenever they fell
into danger by land or sea, to call upon his name; and they thought that
always they got comfort and aid by it, for where he was they thought
help was near. Often he went away so long that he passed many seasons on
his journeys.

    [Footnote 111: Asgard is supposed, by those who look for
    historical fact in mythological tales, to be the present Assor;
    others, that it is Chasgar in the Caucasian ridge, called by
    Strabo Aspargum the Asburg, or castle of the asas. We still have
    in the Norse tongue the word Aas, meaning a ridge of high land.
    The word asas is not derived from Asia, as Snorre supposed. It is
    the O.H. Ger. _ans_; Anglo-Sax. _os_ = a hero. The word also
    means a pillar; and in this latter sense the gods are the pillars
    of the universe. Connected with the word is undoubtedly Aas, a
    mountain-ridge, as supporter of the skies; and this reminds us of
    _Atlas_, as bearer of the world.]

    [Footnote 112: The temple-priests performed the functions of
    priest and judge, and their office continued hereditary throughout
    the heathen period of Norse history.]

Odin had two brothers, the one hight Ve, the other Vile,[113] and they
governed the kingdom when he was absent. It happened once when Odin had
gone to a great distance, and had been so long away that the people of
Asia doubted if he would ever return home, that his two brothers took it
upon themselves to divide his estate; but both of them took his wife
Frigg to themselves. Odin soon after returned home, and took his wife
back.

    [Footnote 113: See Norse Mythology, page 174.]

Odin went out with a great army against the Vanaland people; but they
were well prepared, and defended their land, so that victory was
changeable, and they ravaged the lands of each other and did great
damage. They tired of this at last, and, on both sides appointing a
meeting for establishing peace, made a truce and exchanged hostages. The
Vanaland people sent their best men,--Njord the Rich and his son Frey;
the people of Asaland sent a man hight Hœner,[114] as he was a stout and
very handsome man, and with him they sent a man of great understanding,
called Mimer; and on the other side the Vanaland people sent the wisest
man in their community, who was called Quaser. Now when Hœner came to
Vanaheim he was immediately made a chief, and Mimer came to him with
good counsel on all occasions. But when Hœner stood in the Things, or
other meetings, if Mimer was not near him, and any difficult matter was
laid before him, he always answered in one way: Now let others give
their advice; so that the Vanaland people got a suspicion that the
Asaland people had deceived them in the exchange of men. They took
Mimer, therefore, and beheaded him, and sent his head to the Asaland
people. Odin took the head, smeared it with herbs, so that it should not
rot, and sang incantations over it. Thereby he gave it the power that it
spoke to him, and discovered to him many secrets.[115] Odin placed Njord
and Frey as priests of the sacrifices, and they became deities of the
Asaland people. Njord’s daughter, Freyja, was priestess of the
sacrifices, and first taught the Asaland people the magic art, as it was
in use and fashion among the Vanaland people. While Njord was with the
Vanaland people he had taken his own sister in marriage, for that was
allowed by their law; and their children were Frey and Freyja. But among
the Asaland people it was forbidden to come together in so near
relationship.[116]

    [Footnote 114: See Brage’s Talk, p. 160; and Norse Mythology,
    pp. 247 and 342.]

    [Footnote 115: In the Vala’s Prophecy of the Elder Edda it is
    said that Odin talks with the head of Mimer before the coming of
    Ragnarok. See Norse Mythology, p. 421.]

    [Footnote 116: This shows that the vans must have belonged to the
    mythological system of some older race that, like the ancient
    Romans (Liber and Libera), recognized the propriety of marriage
    between brothers and sisters, at least among their gods. Such
    marriages were not allowed among our Odinic ancestors. Hence we
    see that when Njord, Frey and Freyja were admitted to Asgard, they
    entered into new marriage relations. Njord married Skade, Frey
    married Gerd, and Freyja married Oder. Our ancestors were never
    savages!]

There goes a great mountain barrier from northeast to southwest, which
divides the Great Svithjod from other kingdoms. South of this mountain
ridge is not far to Turkland, where Odin had great possessions.[117] But
Odin, having foreknowledge and magic-sight, knew that his posterity
would come to settle and dwell in the northern half of the world. In
those times the Roman chiefs went wide around the world, subduing to
themselves all people; and on this account many chiefs fled from their
domains.[118] Odin set his brothers Vile and Ve over Asgard, and he
himself, with all the gods and a great many other people, wandered out,
first westward to Gardarike (Russia), and then south to Saxland
(Germany). He had many sons, and after having subdued an extensive
kingdom in Saxland he set his sons to defend the country. He himself
went northward to the sea, and took up his abode in an island which is
called Odinse (see note below), in Funen. Then he sent Gefjun across the
sound to the north to discover new countries, and she came to King
Gylfe, who gave her a ploughland. Then she went to Jotunheim and bore
four sons to a giant, and transformed them into a yoke of oxen, and
yoked them to a plough and broke out the land into the ocean, right
opposite to Odinse, which was called Seeland, where she afterward
settled and dwelt.[119] Skjold, a son of Odin, married her, and they
dwelt at Leidre.[120] Where the ploughed land was, is a lake or sea
called Laage.[121] In the Swedish land the fjords of Laage correspond to
the nesses of Seeland. Brage the old sings thus of it:

  Gefjun glad
  Drew from Gylfe
  The excellent land,
  Denmark’s increase,
  So that it reeked
  From the running beasts.
  Four heads and eight eyes
  Bore the oxen,
  As they went before the wide
  Robbed land of the grassy isle.[122]

    [Footnote 117: Turkland was usually supposed to mean Moldau and
    Wallachia. Some, who regard the great mountain barrier as being
    the Ural Mountains, think Turkland is Turkistan in Asia. Asia
    Minor is also frequently styled Turkland.]

    [Footnote 118: Ancient Norse writers connect this event with
    Mithridates and Pompey the Great. They tell how Odin was a heroic
    prince who, with his twelve peers or apostles, dwelt in the Black
    Sea region. He became straightened for room, and so led the asas
    out of Asia into eastern Europe. Then they go on to tell how the
    Roman empire had arrived at its highest point of power, and saw
    all the then known world--the orbis terrarum--subject to its laws,
    when an unforeseen event raised up enemies against it from the
    very heart of the forests of Scythia, and on the banks of the Don
    river. The leader was Mithridates the Great, against whom the
    Romans waged three wars, and the Romans looked upon him as the
    most formidable enemy the empire had ever had to contend with.
    Cicero delivered his famous oration, Pro lege Manilia, and
    succeeded in getting Pompey appointed commander of the third war
    against Mithridates. The latter, by flying, had drawn Pompey after
    him into the wilds of Scythia. Here the king of Pontus sought
    refuge and new means of vengeance. He hoped to arm against the
    ambition of Rome all his neighboring nations whose liberties she
    threatened. He was successful at first, but all those Scythian
    peoples, ill-united as allies, ill-armed as soldiers, and still
    worse disciplined, were at length forced to yield to the genius of
    the great general Pompey. And here traditions tell us that Odin
    and the other asas were among the allies of Mithridates. Odin had
    been one of the gallant defenders of Troy, and at the same time,
    with Æneas and Anchises, he had taken flight out of the burning
    and falling city. Now he was obliged to withdraw a second time by
    flight, but this time it was not from the Greeks, but from the
    Romans, whom he had offended by assisting Mithridates. He was now
    compelled to go and seek, in lands unknown to his enemies, that
    safety which he could no longer find in the Scythian forests. He
    then proceeded to the north of Europe, and laid the foundations of
    the Teutonic nations. As fast as he subdued the countries in the
    west and north of Europe he gave them to one or another of his
    sons to govern. Thus it comes to pass that so many sovereign
    families throughout Teutondom are said to be descended from Odin.
    Hengist and Horsa, the chiefs of those Saxons who conquered
    Britain in the fifth century, counted Odin in the number of their
    ancestors. The traditions go on to tell how he conquered Denmark,
    founded Odinse (Odinsve = Odin’s Sanctuary; comp. _ve_ with the
    German _Wei_ in _Weinacht_), and gave the kingdom to his son
    Skjold (shield); how he conquered Sweden, founded the Sigtuna
    temple, and gave the country to his son Yngve; how finally Norway
    had to submit to him, and be ruled by a third son of Odin, Saming.

    It has been seriously contended,--and it would form an important
    element in an epic based on the historical Odin,--that a desire of
    being revenged on the Romans was one of the ruling principles of
    Odin’s whole conduct. Driven by those foes of universal liberty
    from his former home in the east, his resentment was the more
    violent, since the Teutons thought it a sacred duty to revenge all
    injuries, especially those offered to kinsmen or country. Odin had
    no other view in traversing so many distant lands, and in
    establishing with so much zeal his doctrines of valor, than to
    arouse all Teutonic nations, and unite them against so formidable
    and odious a race as the Romans. And we, who live in the light of
    the nineteenth century, and with the records before us, can read
    the history of the convulsions of Europe during the decline of the
    Roman empire; we can understand how that leaven, which Odin left
    in the bosoms of the believers in the asa-faith, first fermented a
    long time in secret; but we can also see how in the fullness of
    time, the signal given, the descendants of Odin fell like a swarm
    of locusts upon this unhappy empire, and, after giving it many
    terrible shocks, eventually overturned it, thus completely
    avenging the insult offered so many centuries before by Pompey to
    their founder Odin. We can understand how it became possible for
    “those vast multitudes, which the populous north poured from her
    frozen loins, to pass the Rhine and the Danube, and come like a
    deluge on the south, and spread beneath Gibraltar and the Libyan
    sands;” how it were possible, we say, for them so largely to
    remodel and invigorate a considerable part of Europe, nay, how
    they could succeed in overrunning and overturning “the rich but
    rotten, the mighty but marrowless, the disciplined but diseased,
    Roman empire; that gigantic and heartless and merciless usurpation
    of soulless materialism and abject superstition of universal
    despotism, of systemized and relentless plunder, and of depravity
    deep as hell.” In connection with this subject we would refer our
    readers to Mallet’s Northern Antiquities, pp. 79-83, where
    substantially the same account is given; to Norse Mythology, pp.
    232-236; to George Stephen’s Runic Monuments, Vol. I; and to
    Charles Kingsley’s The Roman and the Teuton.]

    [Footnote 119: Compare this version of the myth with the one given
    in the first chapter of The Fooling of Gylfe. Many explain the
    myth to mean the breaking through of the Baltic between Sweden and
    Denmark.]

    [Footnote 120: Leidre or Leire, at the end of Isefjord, in the
    county of Lithraborg, is considered the oldest royal seat in
    Denmark.]

    [Footnote 121: Laage is a general name for lakes and rivers. It
    here stands for Lake Malar, in Sweden.]

    [Footnote 122: The grassy isle is Seeland.]

Now when Odin heard that things were in a prosperous condition in the
land to the east beside Gylfe, he went thither, and Gylfe made a peace
with him, for Gylfe thought he had no strength to oppose the people of
Asaland. Odin and Gylfe had many tricks and enchantments against each
other; but the Asaland people had always the superiority. Odin took up
his residence at the Malar lake, at the place now called Sigtun.[123]
There he erected a large temple, where there were sacrifices according
to the customs of the Asaland people. He appropriated to himself the
whole of that district of country, and called it Sigtun. To the temple
gods he gave also domains. Njord dwelt in Noatun, Frey in Upsal, Heimdal
in Himinbjorg, Thor in Thrudvang, Balder in Breidablik;[124] to all of
them he gave good domains.

    [Footnote 123: Sigtun. _Sige_, Ger. Sieg, (comp. Sigfrid,) means
    victory, and is one of Odin’s names; _tun_ means an inclosure, and
    is the same word as our modern English _town_. Thus Sigtun would,
    in modern English, be called Odinstown; like our Johnstown,
    Williamstown, etc.]

    [Footnote 124: Noatun, Thrudvang, Breidablik and Himinbjorg are
    purely mythological names, and for their significance the reader
    is referred to The Fooling of Gylfe. Snorre follows the lay of
    Grimner in the Elder Edda.]

When Odin of Asaland came to the north, and the gods with him, he began
to exercise and to teach others the arts which the people long afterward
have practiced. Odin was the cleverest of all, and from him all others
learned their magic arts; and he knew them first, and knew many more
than other people. But now, to tell why he is held in such high respect,
we must mention various causes that contributed to it. When sitting
among his friends his countenance was so beautiful and friendly, that
the spirits of all were exhilarated by it; but when he was in war, he
appeared fierce and dreadful. This arose from his being able to change
his color and form in any way he liked. Another cause was, that he
conversed so cleverly and smoothly, that all who heard were persuaded.
He spoke everything in rhyme, such as is now composed, and which we call
skald-craft. He and his temple gods were called song-smiths, for from
them came that art of song into the northern countries. Odin could make
his enemies in battle blind or deaf, or terror-struck, and their weapons
so blunt that they could no more cut than a willow-twig; on the other
hand, his men rushed forward without armor, were as mad as dogs or
wolves, bit their shields, and were strong as bears or wild bulls, and
killed people at a blow, and neither fire nor iron told upon them. These
were called berserks.[125]

    [Footnote 125: Berserk. The etymology of this word has been much
    contested. Some, upon the authority of Snorre in the above quoted
    passage, derive it from berr (_bare_) and serkr (comp. _sark_,
    Scotch for shirt); but this etymology is inadmissible, because
    serkr is a substantive, not an adjective. Others derive it from
    berr (Germ. _Bär_ = _ursus_), which is greatly to be preferred,
    for in olden ages athletes and champions used to wear hides of
    bears, wolves and reindeer (as skins of lions in the south), hence
    the names Bjalfe, Bjarnhedinn, Ulfhedinn (hedinn, _pellis_),--
    “pellibus aut parvis rhenonum tegimentis utuntur.” Cæsar, Bell.
    Gall. VI, 22. Even the old poets understood the name so, as may be
    seen in the poem of Hornklofi (beginning of the 10th century),
    a dialogue between a valkyrie and a raven, where the valkyrie says
    at berserkja reiðu vil ek þik spyrja, to which the raven replies,
    Ulfhednar heita, _they are called wolf coats_. In battle the
    berserks were subject to fits of frenzy, called _berserksgangr_
    (_furor bersercicus_), when they howled like wild beasts, foamed at
    the mouth, and gnawed the iron rim of their shields. During these
    fits they were, according to a popular belief, proof against steel
    and fire, and made great havoc in the ranks of the enemy. But when
    the fever abated they were weak and tame. Vigfusson Cleasby’s
    Icelandic-English Dictionary, _sub voce_.]

Odin could transform his shape; his body would lie as if dead or asleep,
but then he would be in the shape of a fish, or worm, or bird, or beast,
and be off in a twinkling to distant lands upon his own or other
peoples’ business. With words alone he could quench fire, still the
ocean in tempest, and turn the wind to any quarter he pleased. Odin had
a ship, which he called Skidbladner,[126] in which he sailed over wide
seas, and which he could roll up like a cloth. Odin carried with him
Mimer’s head, which told him all the news of other countries. Sometimes
even he called the dead out of the earth, or set himself beside the
burial-mounds; whence he was called the ghost-sovereign, and the lord of
the mounds. He had two ravens,[127] to whom he had taught the speech of
man; and they flew far and wide through the land, and brought him the
news. In all such things he was preëminently wise. He taught all these
arts in runes and songs, which are called incantations, and therefore
the Asaland people are called incantation-smiths. Odin also understood
the art in which the greatest power is lodged, and which he himself
practiced, namely, what is called magic. By means of this he could know
beforehand the predestined fate[128] of men, or their not yet completed
lot, and also bring on the death, ill-luck or bad health of people, or
take away the strength or wit from one person and give it to another.
But after such witchcraft followed such weakness and anxiety, that it
was not thought respectable for men to practice it; and therefore the
priestesses were brought up in this art. Odin knew definitely where all
missing cattle were concealed under the earth, and understood the songs
by which the earth, the hills, the stones and mounds were opened to him;
and he bound those who dwell in them by the power of his word, and went
in and took what he pleased. From these arts he became very celebrated.
His enemies dreaded him; his friends put their trust in him, and relied
on his power and on himself. He taught the most of his arts to his
priests of the sacrifices, and they came nearest to himself in all
wisdom and witch-knowledge. Many others, however, occupied themselves
much with it; and from that time witchcraft spread far and wide, and
continued long. People sacrificed to Odin, and the twelve chiefs of
Asaland,--called them their gods, and believed in them long after. From
Odin’s name came the name Audun, which people gave to his sons; and from
Thor’s name came Thorer, also Thorarinn; and it was also sometimes
augmented by other additions, as Steinthor, Hafthor, and many kinds of
alterations.

    [Footnote 126: In the mythology this ship belongs to Frey, having
    been made for him by the dwarfs.]

    [Footnote 127: Hugin and Munin.]

    [Footnote 128: The old Norse word is órlög, which is plural, (from
    ör = Ger. _ur_, and lög, _laws_,) and means the primal law, fate,
    weird, doom; the Greek μοῖρα. The idea of predestination was a
    salient feature in the Odinic religion. The word örlog, O.H.G.
    _urlac_, M.H.G. _urlone_, Dutch _orlog_, had special reference to
    a man’s fate in war. Hence Orlogschiffe in German means a naval
    fleet. The Danish orlog means warfare at sea.]

Odin established the same law in his land that had been before in
Asaland. Thus he established by law that all dead men should be burned,
and their property laid with them upon the pile, and the ashes be cast
into the sea or buried in the earth. Thus, said he, everyone will come
to Valhal with the riches he had with him upon the pile; and he would
also enjoy whatever he himself had buried in the earth. For men of
consequence a mound should be raised to their memory, and for all other
warriors who had been distinguished for manhood, a standing stone; which
custom remained long after Odin’s time. Toward winter there should be a
blood-sacrifice for a good year, and in the middle of winter for a good
crop; and the third sacrifice should be in summer, for victory in
battle. Over all Svithjod[129] the people paid Odin a scatt, or tax,--so
much on each head; but he had to defend the country from enemy or
disturbance, and pay the expense of the sacrifice-feasts toward winter
for a good year.

    [Footnote 129: Svithjod, which here means Sweden, is derived from
    Odin’s name, Svidr and thjod = folk, people. Svithjod thus means
    Odin’s people, and the country takes its name from the people.]

Njord took a wife hight Skade; but she would not live with him, but
married afterward Odin, and had many sons by him, of whom one was called
Saming, and of this Eyvind Skaldespiller sings thus:

  To Asason[130] Queen Skade bore
  Saming, who dyed his shield in gore,--
  The giant queen of rock and snow
  Who loves to dwell on earth below,
  The iron pine-tree’s daughter she,
  Sprung from the rocks that rib the sea,
  To Odin bore full many a son,--
  Heroes of many a battle won.

    [Footnote 130: Odin.]

To Saming Jarl Hakon the Great reckoned up his pedigree.[131] This
Svithjod (Sweden) they call Mannheim, but the great Svithjod they call
Godheim, and of Godheim great wonders and novelties were related.

    [Footnote 131: Norway was given to Saming by Odin.]

Odin died in his bed in Sweden; and when he was near his death he made
himself be marked with the point of a spear,[132] and said he was going
to Godheim, and would give a welcome there to all his friends, and all
brave warriors should be dedicated to him; and the Swedes believed that
he was gone to the ancient Asgard, and would live there eternally. Then
began the belief in Odin, and the calling upon him. The Swedes believed
that he often showed himself to them before any great battle. To some he
gave victory, others he invited to himself; and they reckoned both of
these to be well off in their fate. Odin was burnt, and at his pile
there was great splendor. It was their faith that the higher the smoke
arose in the air, the higher would he be raised whose pile it was; and
the richer he would be the more property that was consumed with him.

    [Footnote 132: He gave himself nine wounds in the form of the head
    of a spear, or Thor’s hammer; that is, he marked himself with the
    sign of the _cross_, an ancient heathen custom.]

Njord of Noatun was then the sole sovereign of the Swedes; and he
continued the sacrifices, and was called the drot, or sovereign, by the
Swedes, and he received scatt and gifts from them. In his days were
peace and plenty, and such good years in all respects that the Swedes
believed Njord ruled over the growth of seasons and the prosperity of
the people. In his time all the diars, or gods, died, and
blood-sacrifices were made for them. Njord died on a bed of sickness,
and before he died made himself be marked for Odin with the spear-point.
The Swedes burned him, and all wept over his grave-mound.

Frey took the kingdom after Njord, and was called drot by the Swedes,
and they paid taxes to him. He was like his father, fortunate in friends
and in good seasons. Frey built a great temple at Upsala, made it his
chief seat, and gave it all his taxes, his land and goods. Then began
the Upsala domains, which have remained ever since. Then began in his
day the Frode-peace; and then there were good seasons in all the land,
which the Swedes ascribed to Frey, so that he was more worshiped than
the other gods, as the people became much richer in his days by reason
of the peace and good seasons. His wife was called Gerd, daughter of
Gymer, and their son was called Fjolner. Frey was called by another
name, Yngve; and this name Yngve was considered long after in his race
as a name of honor, so that his descendants have since been called
Ynglings (_i.e._ Yngve-lings). Frey fell into a sickness, and as his
illness took the upper hand, his men took the plan of letting few
approach him. In the meantime they raised a great mound, in which they
placed a door with three holes in it. Now when Frey died they bore him
secretly into the mound, but told the Swedes he was alive, and they kept
watch over him for three years. They brought all the taxes into the
mound, and through the one hole they put in the gold, through the other
the silver, and through the third the copper money that was paid. Peace
and good seasons continued.

Freyja alone remained of the gods, and she became on this account so
celebrated that all women of distinction were called by her name, whence
they now have the title Frue (Germ. _Frau_), so that every woman is
called frue (that is, mistress) over her property, and the wife is
called the house-frue. Freyja continued the blood-sacrifices. Freyja had
also many other names. Her husband was called Oder, and her daughters
Hnos and Gersame. They were so very beautiful that afterward the most
precious jewels were called by their names.

When it became known to the Swedes that Frey was dead, and yet peace and
good seasons continued, they believed that it must be so as long as Frey
remained in Sweden, and therefore they would not burn his remains, but
called him the god of this world, and afterward offered continually
blood-sacrifices to him, principally for peace and good seasons.[133]

    [Footnote 133: Here ends Snorre’s account of the asas in
    Heimskringla. The reader will, of course, compare the account here
    given of Odin, Njord, Frey, Freyja, etc., with the purely
    mythological description of them in the Younger Edda, and with
    that in Norse Mythology. Upon the whole, Snorre has striven to
    accommodate his sketch to the Eddas, while he has had to clothe
    mythical beings with the characteristics of human kings. Like
    Saxo-Grammaticus, Snorre has striven to show that the deities,
    which we now recognize as personified forces and phenomena of
    nature, were extraordinary and enterprising persons, who formerly
    ruled in the North, and inaugurated the customs, government and
    religion of Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Germany, England, and the
    other Teutonic lands.]


FORNJOT AND THE SETTLEMENT OF NORWAY.

In the asa-faith we find various foreign elements introduced. Thus, for
example, the vans did not originally belong to the Odinic system. As the
Teutons came in contact with other races, the religious ideas of the
latter were frequently adopted in some modified form. Especially do
Finnish elements enter into the asa-system. The Finnish god of thunder
was Ukko. He is supposed to have been confounded with our Thor, whence
the latter got the name Öku-Thor (Ukko-Thor). The vans may be connected
with the Finnish Wainamoinen, and in the same manner a number of Celtic
elements have been mixed with Teutonic mythology. And this is not all.
There must have flourished a religious system in the North before the
arrival of Odin and his apostles. This was probably either Tshudic or
Celtic, or a mixture of the two. The asa-doctrine superseded it, but
there still remain traces in some of the oldest records of the North.
Thus we have in the prehistoric sagas of Iceland an account of the
finding of Norway, wherein it is related that Fornjot,[134] in Jotland,
which is also called Finland or Quenland, east of the Gulf of Bothnia,
had three sons: Hler, also called Æger, Loge and Kare.[135] Of Loge it
is related that he was of giant descent, and, being very tall of
stature, he was called Haloge, that is High Loge; and after him the
northern part of Norway is called Halogaland (now Helgeland). He was
married to Glod (a red-hot coal), and had with her two daughters, Eysa
and Eimyrja; both words meaning glowing embers. Haloge had two jarls,
Vifil (the one taking a vif = wife) and Vesete (the one who sits at the
ve = the sanctuary, that is, the dweller by the hearth, the first
sanctuary), who courted his daughters; the former addressing himself to
Eimyrja, the latter to Eysa, but the king refusing to give his consent,
they carried them away secretly. Vesete settled in Borgundarholm
(Bornholm), and had a son, Bue (one who settles on a farm); Vifil sailed
further east and settled on the island Vifilsey, on the coast of Sweden,
and had a son, Viking (the pirate).

    [Footnote 134: The word fornjot can be explained in two ways:
    either as for-njot = the first enjoyer, possessor; or as forn-jot,
    the ancient giant. He would then correspond to Ymer.]

    [Footnote 135: Notice this trinity: Hler is the sea (comp. the
    Welsh word _llyr_ = sea); Loge is fire (comp. the Welsh _llwg_),
    he reminds us both by his name and his nature of Loke; Kare is the
    wind.]

The third son, Kare, had a numerous offspring. He had one son by name
Jokul (iceberg), another Froste (frost), and Froste’s son was named Sna
(snow). He had a third son, by name Thorri (bare frost), after whom the
mid-winter month, Thorra-month, was called; and his daughters hight Fonn
(packed snow), Drifa (snow-drift), and Mjoll (meal, fine snow). All
these correspond well to Kare’s name, which, as stated, means wind.
Thorri had two sons, Nor and Gor, and a daughter, Goe. The story goes on
to tell how Goe, the sister, was lost, and how the brothers went to
search for her, until they finally found him who had robbed her. He was
Hrolf, from the mountain, a son of the giant Svade, and a grandson of
Asa-Thor. They settled their trouble, and thereupon Hrolf married Goe,
and Nor married Hrolf’s sister, settled in the land and called it after
his own name, Norvegr, that is, Norway. By this story we are reminded of
Kadmos, who went to seek his lost sister Europa. In the Younger Edda the
winds are called the sons of Fornjot, the sea is called the son of
Fornjot, and the brother of the fire and of the winds, and Fornjot is
named among the old giants. This makes it clear that Fornjot and his
offspring are not historical persons, but cosmological impersonations.
And additional proof of this is found by an examination of the beginning
of the Saga of Thorstein, Viking’s Son. (See Viking Tales of the North,
pp. 1 and 2).


THE FOOLING OF GYLFE.

CHAPTER I.

This story about the ploughing of Gylfe reminds us of the legend told in
the first book of Virgil’s Æneid, about the founding of Carthage by
Dido, who bought from the Libyan king as much ground as she could cover
with a bull’s hide. Elsewhere it is related that she cut the bull’s hide
into narrow strips and encircled therewith all the ground upon which
Carthage was afterward built. Thus Dido deceived the Libyan king nearly
as effectually as Gefjun deluded King Gylfe. The story is also told by
Snorre in Heimskringla, see p. 231.

The passage in verse, which has given translators so much trouble in a
transposed form, would read as follows: Gefjun glad drew that excellent
land (djúpródul = the deep sun = gold; öðla = udal = property; djúpródul
öðla = the golden property), Denmark’s increase (Seeland), so that it
reeked (steamed) from the running oxen. The oxen bore four heads and
eight eyes, as they went before the wide piece of robbed land of the
isle so rich in grass.

Gefjun is usually interpreted as a goddess of agriculture, and her name
is by some derived from γῆ; and _fjon_, that is, _terræ separatio_;
others compare it with the Anglo-Saxon _geofon_ = the sea. The etymology
remains very uncertain.

CHAPTER II.

It is to the delusion or eye-deceit mentioned in this chapter that
Snorre Sturlasson refers in his Heimskringla, in Chapter VI of Ynglinga
Saga.

Thjodolf of Hvin was a celebrated skald at the court of Harald Fairhair.

Thinking thatchers, etc. Literally transposed, this passage would read:
Reflecting men let shields (literally Svafner’s, that is Odin’s
roof-trees,) glisten on the back. They were smitten with stones. To let
shields glisten on the back, is said of men who throw their shields on
their backs to protect themselves against those who pursue the flying
host.

Har means the High One, Jafnhar the Equally High One, and Thride the
Third One. By these three may be meant the three chief gods of the
North: Odin, Thor and Frey; or they may be simply an expression of the
Eddic trinity. This trinity is represented in a number of ways: by Odin,
Vile and Ve in the creation of the world, and by Odin, Hœner and Loder
in the creation of Ask and Embla, the first human pair. The number three
figures extensively in all mythological systems. In the pre-chaotic
state we have Muspelheim, Niflheim and Ginungagap. Fornjot had three
sons: Hler, Loge and Kare. There are three norns: Urd, Verdande and
Skuld. There are three fountains: Hvergelmer, Urd’s and Mimer’s; etc.
(See Norse Mythology, pp. 183, 195, 196.)

Har being Odin, Har’s Hall will be Valhal. You will not come out from
this hall unless you are wiser. In the lay of Vafthrudner, of the Elder
Edda, we have a similar challenge, where Vafthrudner says to Odin:

  Out will you not come
  From our halls
  Unless I find you to be wiser (than I am).

CHAPTER III.

This chapter gives twelve names of Odin. In the Eddas and in the skaldic
lays he has in all nearly two hundred names. His most common name is
Odin (in Anglo-Saxon and in Old High German _Wodan_), and this is
thought by many to be of the same origin as our word _god_. The other
Old Norse word for god, _tivi_, is identical in root with Lat. _divus_;
Sansk. _dwas_; Gr. Διός (Ζεύς); and this is again connected with _Tyr_,
the Tivisco in the Germania of Tacitus. (See Max Müller’s Lectures on
the Science of Language, 2d series, p. 425). Paulus Diakonus states that
Wodan, or Gwodan, was worshiped by all branches of the Teutons. Odin has
also been sought and found in the Scythian _Zalmoxis_, in the Indian
_Buddha_, in the Celtic Budd, and in the Mexican Votan. Zalmoxis,
derived from the Gr. Ζαλμός, helmet, reminds us of Odin as the
helmet-bearer (Grimm, Gesch. der Deutschen Sprache). According to
Humboldt, a race in Guatemala, Mexico, claim to be descended from
Votan (Vues des Cordillères, 1817, I, 208). This suggests the question
whether Odin’s name may not have been brought to America by the Norse
discoverers in the 10th and 11th centuries, and adopted by some of the
native races. In the Lay of Grimner (Elder Edda) the following names of
Odin are enumerated:

  Grim is my name
  And Ganglere,
  Herjan and Helmet-bearer,
  Thekk and Thride,
  Thud and Ud,
  Helblinde and Har,

  Sad and Svipal,
  And Sanngetal,
  Herteit and Hnikar,
  Bileyg and Baleyg,
  Bolverk, Fjolner,
  Grim and Grimner,
  Glapsvid and Fjolsvid,

  Sidhot, Sidskeg,
  Sigfather, Hnikud,
  Alfather, Valfather,
  Atrid and Farmatyr.
  With one name
  Was I never named
  When I fared ’mong the peoples.

  Grimner they called me
  Here at Geirrod’s,
  But Jalk at Asmund’s,
  And Kjalar the time
  When sleds (kjalka) I drew,
  And Thror at the Thing,
  Vidur on the battle-field,
  Oske and Ome,
  Jafnhar and Biflinde,
  Gondler and Harbard ’mong the gods.

  Svidur and Svidre
  Hight I at Sokmimer’s,
  And fooled the ancient giant
  When I alone Midvitne’s,
  The mighty son’s,
  Bane had become.

  Odin I now am called,
  Ygg was my name before,
  Before that I hight Thund,
  Yak and Skilfing,
  Vafud and Hroptatyr,
  Got and Jalk ’mong the gods,
  Ofner and Svafner.
  All these names, I trow,
  Have to me alone been given.

What the etymology of all these names is, it is not easy to tell. The
most of them are clearly Norse words, and express the various activities
of their owner. It is worthy of notice that it is added when and where
Odin bore this or that name (his name was Grim at Geirrod’s, Jalk at
Asmund’s, etc.), and that the words sometimes indicate a progressive
development, as Thund, then Ygg, and then Odin. First he was a mere
sound in the air (Thund), then he took to thinking (Ygg), and at last he
became the inspiring soul of the universe. Although we are unable to
define all these names, they certainly each have a distinct meaning, and
our ancestors certainly understood them perfectly. Har = the High One;
Jafn-har = the Equally High One; Thride = the Third (Ζεὺς ἄλλος and
Τρίτος); Alfather probably contracted from _Alda_father = the Father of
the Ages and the Creations; Veratyr = the Lord of Beings; Rögner = the
Ruler (from regin); Got (Gautr, from _gjóta_, to cast) = the Creator,
Lat. Instillator; Mjotud = the Creator, the word being allied to
Anglo-Saxon _meotod_, _metod_, Germ. _Messer_, and means originally
cutter; but to cut and to make are synonymous. Such names as these have
reference to Odin’s divinity as creator, arranger and ruler of gods and
men. Svid and Fjolsvid = the swift, the wise; Ganglere, Gangrad and
Vegtam = the wanderer, the waywont; Vidrer = the weather-ruler, together
with serpent-names like Ofner, Svafner, etc., refer to Odin’s knowledge,
his journeys, the various shapes he assumes. Permeating all nature, he
appears in all its forms. Names like Sidhot = the slouchy hat; Sidskeg =
the long-beard; Baleyg = the burning-eye; Grimner = the masked; Jalk
(Jack) = the youth, etc., express the various forms in which he was
thought to appear,--to his slouchy hat, his long beard, or his age, etc.
Such names as Sanngetal = the true investigator; Farmatyr = the
cargo-god, etc., refer to his various occupations as inventor,
discoverer of runes, protector of trade and commerce, etc. Finally, all
such names as Herfather = father of hosts; Herjan = the devastator;
Sigfather = the father of victory; Sigtyr = god of victory; Skilfing =
producing trembling; Hnikar = the breaker, etc., represent Odin as the
god of war and victory. Oske = wish, is thus called because he gratifies
our desires. Gimle, as will be seen later, is the abode of the blessed
after Ragnarok. Vingolf (Vin and golf) means _friends’ floor_, and is
the hall of the goddesses. Hel is the goddess of death, and from her
name our word _hell_ is derived.

Our ancestors divided the universe into nine worlds: the uppermost was
Muspelheim (the world of light); the lowest was Niflheim (the world of
darkness). Compare the Greek word νεφέλη = mist. (See Norse Mythology,
p. 187.)

GINUNGAGAP. Ginn means wide, large, far-reaching, perhaps also void
(compare the Anglo-Saxon _gin_ = gaping, open, spacious; ginian = to
gap; and ginnung = a yawning). Ginungagap thus means the yawning gap or
abyss, and represents empty space. The poets use ginnung in the sense of
a fish and of a hawk, and in geographical saga-fragments it is used as
the name of the Polar Sea.

HVERGELMER. This word is usually explained as a transposition for
Hvergemler, which would then be derived from Hver and gamall (old) = the
old kettle; but Petersen shows that gelmir must be taken from galm,
which is still found in the Jutland dialect, and means a gale (compare
Golmstead = a windy place, and _golme_ = to roar, blow). Gelmer is then
the one producing galm, and Hvergelmer thus means the roaring kettle.
The twelve rivers proceeding from Hvergelmer are called the Elivogs
(Élivágar) in the next chapter. Éli-vágar means, according to Vigfusson,
ice-waves. The most of the names occur in the long list of river names
given in the Lay of Grimner, of the Elder Edda. Svol = the cool;
Gunnthro = the battle-trough. Slid is also mentioned in the Vala’s
Prophecy, where it is represented as being full of mud and swords. Sylg
(from _svelgja_ = to swallow) = the devourer; Ylg (from _yla_ = to roar)
= the roaring one; Leipt = the glowing, is also mentioned in the Lay of
Helge Hunding’s Bane, where it is stated that they swore by it (compare
Styx); Gjoll (from _gjalla_ = to glisten and clang) = the shining,
clanging one. The meaning of the other words is not clear, but they
doubtless all, like those explained, express cold, violent motion, etc.
The most noteworthy of these rivers are Leipt and Gjoll. In the Lay of
Grimner they are said to flow nearest to the abode of man, and fall
thence into Hel’s realm. Over Gjoll was the bridge which Hermod, after
the death of Balder, crossed on his way to Hel. It is said to be
thatched with shining gold, and a maid by name Modgud watches it. In the
song of Sturle Thordson, on the death of Skule Jarl, it is said that
“the king’s kinsman went over the Gjoll-bridge.” The farther part of the
horizon, which often appears like a broad bright stream, may have
suggested this river.

SURT means the swarthy or black one. Many have regarded him as the
unknown (dark) god, but this is probably an error. But there was some
one in Muspelheim who sent the heat, and gave life to the frozen drops
of rime. The latter, and not Surt, who is a giant, is the eternal god,
the mighty one, whom the skald in the Lay of Hyndla dare not name. It is
interesting to notice that our ancestors divided the evolution of the
world into three distinct periods: (1) a pre-chaotic condition
(Niflheim, Muspelheim and Ginungagap); (2) a chaotic condition (Ymer and
the cow Audhumbla); (3) and finally the three gods, Odin (spirit), Vile
(will) and Ve (sanctity), transformed chaos into cosmos. And away back
in this pre-chaotic state of the world we find this mighty being who
sends the heat. It is not definitely stated, but it can be inferred from
other passages, that just as the good principle existed from everlasting
in Muspelheim, so the evil principle existed co-eternally with it in
Hvergelmer in Niflheim. Hvergelmer is the source out of which all matter
first proceeded, and the dragon or devil Nidhug, who dwells in
Hvergelmer, is, in our opinion, the evil principle who is from eternity.
The good principle shall continue forever, but the evil shall cease to
exist after Ragnarok.

YMER is the noisy one, and his name is derived from _ymja_ = to howl
(compare also the Finnish deity Jumo, after whom the town Umea takes its
name, like Odinse).

AURGELMER, THRUDGELMER and BERGELMER express the gradual development
from aur (clay) to thrud (that which is compressed), and finally to berg
(rock).

VIDOLF, VILMEIDE and SVARTHOFDE are mentioned nowhere else in the
mythology.

BURE and BORE mean the bearing and the born; that is, father and son.

BOLTHORN means the miserable one, from bol = evil; and Bestla may mean
that which is best. The idea then is that Bor united himself with that
which was best of the miserable material at hand.

That the flood caused by the slaying of Ymer reminds us of Noah and his
ark, and of the Greek flood, needs only to be suggested.

CHAPTER IV.

ASK means an ash-tree, and EMBLA an elm-tree.

While the etymology of the names in the myths are very obscure, the
myths themselves are clear enough. Similar myths abound in Greek
mythology. The story about Bil and Hjuke is our old English rhyme about
Jack and Gill, who went up the hill to fetch a pail of water.

CHAPTER V.

In reference to the golden age, see Norse Mythology, pp. 182 and 197.

In the appendix to the German so-called Hero-Book we are told that the
dwarfs were first created to cultivate the desert lands and the
mountains; thereupon the giants, to subdue the wild beasts; and finally
the heroes, to assist the dwarfs against the treacherous giants. While
the giants are always hostile to the gods, the dwarfs are usually
friendly to them.

DWARFS. Both giants and dwarfs shun the light. If surprised by the
breaking forth of day, they become changed to stone. In one of the poems
of the Elder Edda (the Alvismál), Thor amuses the dwarf Alvis with
various questions till daylight, and then cooly says to him: With great
artifices, I tell you, you have been deceived; you are surprised here,
dwarf, by daylight! The sun now shines in the hall. In the Helgakvida
Atle says to the giantess Hrimgerd: It is now day, Hrimgerd! But Atle
has detained you, to your life’s perdition. It will appear a laughable
harbor-mark, where you stand as a stone-image.

In the German tales the dwarfs are described as deformed and diminutive,
coarsely clad and of dusky hue: “a little black man,” “a little gray
man.” They are sometimes of the height of a child of four years,
sometimes as two spans high, a thumb high (hence, Tom Thumb). The old
Danish ballad of Eline of Villenwood mentions a troll not bigger than an
ant. Dvergmál (the speech of the dwarfs) is the Old Norse expression for
the echo in the mountains.

In the later popular belief, the dwarfs are generally called the
subterraneans, the brown men in the moor, etc. They make themselves
invisible by a hat or hood. The women spin and weave, the men are
smiths. In Norway rock-crystal is called dwarf-stone. Certain stones are
in Denmark called dwarf-hammers. They borrow things and seek advice from
people, and beg aid for their wives when in labor, all which services
they reward. But they also lame cattle, are thievish, and will carry off
damsels. There have been instances of dwarf females having married and
had children with men. (Thorpe’s Northern Mythology.)

WAR. It was the first warfare in the world, says the Elder Edda, when
they pierced Gullveig (gold-thirst) through with a spear, and burned her
in Odin’s hall. Thrice they burned her, thrice she was born anew: again
and again, but still she lives. When she comes to a house they call her
Heide (the bright, the welcome), and regard her as a propitious vala or
prophetess. She can tame wolves, understands witchcraft, and delights
wicked women. Hereupon the gods consulted together whether they should
punish this misdeed, or accept a blood-fine, when Odin cast forth a
spear among mankind, and now began war and slaughter in the world. The
defenses of the burgh of the asas was broken down. The vans anticipated
war, and hastened over the field. The valkyries came from afar, ready to
ride to the gods’ people: Skuld with the shield, Skogul, Gunn, Hild,
Gondul and Geirr Skogul. (Quoted by Thorpe.)

CHAPTER VI.

In reference to Ygdrasil, we refer our readers to Norse Mythology, pp.
205-211, and to Thomas Carlyle’s Heroes and Hero-worship.

A connection between the norns Urd, Verdande and Skuld and the weird
sisters in Shakspeare’s _Macbeth_ has long since been recognized; but
new light has recently been thrown upon the subject by the philosopher
Karl Blind, who has contributed valuable articles on the subject in the
German periodical “Die Gegenwart” and in the “London Academy.” We take
the liberty of reproducing here an abstract of his article in the
“Academy”:

      *    *    *    *    *    *

  The fact itself of these Witches being simply transfigurations, or
  later disguises, of the Teutonic Norns is fully established--as may
  be seen from Grimm or Simrock. In delineating these hags, Shakspeare
  has practically drawn upon old Germanic sources, perhaps upon
  current folk-lore of his time.

  It has always struck me as noteworthy that in the greater part of
  the scene between the Weird Sisters, Macbeth and Banquo, and
  wherever the Witches come in, Shakspeare uses the staff-rime in a
  remarkable manner. Not only does this add powerfully to the archaic
  impressiveness and awe, but it also seems to bring the form and
  figure of the Sisters of Fate more closely within the circle of the
  Teutonic idea. I have pointed out this striking use of the
  alliterative system in _Macbeth_ in an article on “An old German
  Poem and a Vedic Hymn,” which appeared in _Fraser_ in June, 1877,
  and in which the derivation of the Weird Sisters from the Germanic
  Norns is mentioned.

  The very first scene in the first act of _Macbeth_ opens strongly
  with the staff-rime:

    _1st Witch_. When shall we three meet again--
    In thunder, lightning or in rain?

    _2d Witch_. When the hurly-burly’s done,
    When the battle’s lost and won.

    _3d Witch_. That will be ere set of sun.

    _1st Witch_. Where the place?

    _2d Witch_.              Upon the heath.

    _3d Witch_. There to meet with Macbeth.

    _1st Witch_. I come, Graymalkin!

    _All_. Paddock calls. Anon.
    Fair is foul, and foul is fair.
    Hover through the fog and filthy air.

  Not less marked is the adoption of the fullest staff-rime--together
  (as above) with the end-rime--in the third scene, when the Weird
  Sisters speak. Again, there is the staff-rime when Banquo addresses
  them. Again, the strongest alliteration, combined with the end-rime,
  runs all through the Witches’ spell-song in Act iv, scene 1. This
  feature in Shakspeare appears to me to merit closer investigation;
  all the more so because a less regular alliteration, but still a
  marked one, is found in not a few passages of a number of his plays.
  Only one further instance of the systematic employment of
  alliteration may here be noted in passing. It is in Ariel’s songs in
  the _Tempest_, Act i, scene 2. Schlegel and Tieck evidently did not
  observe this alliterative peculiarity. Their otherwise excellent
  translation does not render it, except so far as the obvious
  similarity of certain English and German words involuntarily made
  them do so. But in the notes to their version of _Macbeth_ the
  character of the Weird Sisters is also misunderstood, though
  Warburton is referred to, who had already suggested their
  derivations from the Valkyrs or Norns.

  It is an error to say that the Witches in _Macbeth_ “are never
  called witches” (compare Act i, scene 3: “‘Give me!’ quoth I.
  ‘A-roint thee, _witch_!’ the rump-fed ronyon cries”). However, their
  designation as Weird Sisters fully settles the case of their
  Germanic origin.

  This name “Weird” is derived from the Anglo-Saxon Norn Wyrd (Sax.
  _Wurth_; O.H. Ger. _Wurd_; Norse, _Urd_), who represents the Past,
  as her very name shows. Wurd is _die Gewordene_--the “Has Been,” or
  rather the “Has Become,” if one could say so in English.

      *    *    *    *    *    *

  In Shakspeare the Witches are three in number--even as in Norse,
  German, as well as in Keltic and other mythologies. Urd, properly
  speaking, is the Past. Skuld is the Future, or “That Which shall
  Be.” Verdandi, usually translated as the Present, has an even deeper
  meaning. Her name is not to be derived from _vera_ (to be), but from
  _verda_ (Ger. _werden_). This verb, which has a mixed meaning of “to
  be,” “to become,” or to “grow,” has been lost in English. Verdandi
  is, therefore, not merely a representative of present Being, but of
  the process of Growing, or of Evolution--which gives her figure a
  profounder aspect. Indeed, there is generally more significance in
  mythological tales than those imagine who look upon them chiefly as
  a barren play of fancy.

  Incidentally it may be remarked that, though Shakspeare’s Weird
  Sisters are three in number--corresponding to Urd, Verdandi and
  Skuld--German and Northern mythology and folk-lore occasionally
  speak of twelve or seven of them. In the German tale of
  _Dornröschen_, or the Sleeping Beauty, there are twelve good fays;
  and a thirteenth, who works the evil spell. Once, in German
  folk-lore, we meet with but two Sisters of Fate--one of them called
  _Kann_, the other _Muss_. Perhaps these are representatives of man’s
  measure of free will (that which he “can”), and of that which is his
  inevitable fate--or, that which he “must” do.

  Though the word “Norn” has been lost in England and Germany, it is
  possibly preserved in a German folk-lore ditty, which speaks of
  three Sisters of Fate as “Nuns.” Altogether, German folk-lore is
  still full of rimes about three Weird Sisters. They are sometimes
  called Wild Women, or Wise Women, or the Measurers
  (_Metten_)--namely, of Fate; or, euphemistically, like the
  Eumenides, the Advisers of Welfare (_Heil-Räthinnen_), reminding us
  of the counsels given to Macbeth in the apparition scene; or the
  Quick Judges (_Gach-Schepfen_). Even as in the Edda, these German
  fays weave and twist threads or ropes, and attach them to distant
  parts, thus fixing the weft of Fate. One of these fays is sometimes
  called Held, and described as black, or as half dark half
  white--like Hel, the Mistress of the Nether World. That German fay
  is also called Rachel, clearly a contraction of Rach-Hel, i.e. the
  Avengeress Hel.

  Now, in _Macbeth_ also the Weird Sisters are described as “black.”
  The coming up of Hekate with them in the cave-scene might not
  unfitly be looked upon as a parallel with the German Held, or
  Rach-Hel, and the Norse Hel; these Teutonic deities being originally
  Goddesses of Nocturnal Darkness, and of the Nether World, even as
  Hekate.

  In German folk-lore, three Sisters of Fate bear the names of Wilbet,
  Worbet and Ainbet. Etymologically these names seem to refer to the
  well-disposed nature of a fay representing the Past; to the warring
  or worrying troubles of the Present; and to the terrors (_Ain_ =
  _Agin_) of the Future. All over southern Germany, from Austria to
  Alsace and Rhenish Hesse, the three fays are known under various
  names besides Wilbet, Worbet, and Ainbet--for instance, as Mechtild,
  Ottilia, and Gertraud; as Irmina, Adela, and Chlothildis, and so
  forth. The fay in the middle of this trio is always a good fay,
  a white fay--but blind. Her treasure (the very names of Ottilia and
  Adela point to a treasure) is continually being taken from her by
  the third fay, a dark and evil one, as well as by the first. This
  myth has been interpreted as meaning that the Present, being blinded
  as to its own existence, is continually being encroached upon,
  robbed as it were, by the dark Future and the Past. Of this
  particular trait there is no vestige in Shakspeare’s Weird Sisters.
  They, like the Norns, “go hand in hand.” But there is another point
  which claims attention Shakspeare’s Witches are bearded. (“You
  should be women, and yet your beards forbid me to interpret that you
  are so.” Act i, scene 3.)

  It need scarcely be brought to recollection that a commingling of
  the female and male character occurs in the divine and semi-divine
  figures of various mythological systems--including the Bearded
  Venus. Of decisive importance is, however, the fact of a bearded
  Weird Sister having apparently been believed in by our heathen
  German forefathers.

  Near Wessobrunn, in Upper Bavaria, where the semi-heathen fragment
  of a cosmogonic lay, known as “Wessobrunn Prayer,” was discovered,
  there has also been found, of late, a rudely-sculptured three-headed
  image. It is looked upon as an ancient effigy of the German Norns.
  The Cloister of the three Holy Bournes, or Fountains, which stands
  close by the place of discovery, is supposed to have been set up on
  ground that had once served for pagan worship. Probably the later
  monkish establishment of the Three Holy Bournes had taken the place
  of a similarly named heathen sanctuary where the three Sisters of
  Fate were once adored. Indeed, the name of all the corresponding
  fays in yet current German folk-lore is connected with holy wells.
  This quite fits in with the three Eddic Bournes near the great Tree
  of Existence, at one of which--apparently at the oldest, which is
  the very Source of Being--the Norns live, “the maidens that over the
  Sea of Age travel in deep foreknowledge,” and of whom it is said
  that:

    They laid the lots, they ruled the life
    To the sons of men, their fate foretelling.

  Now, curiously enough, the central head of the slab found near
  Wessobrunn, in the neighborhood of the Cloister of the Three Holy
  Bournes, is _bearded_. This has puzzled our archæologists. Some of
  them fancied that what appears to be a beard might after all be the
  hair of one of the fays or Norns, tied round the chin. By the light
  of the description of the Weird Sisters in Shakspeare’s _Macbeth_
  we, however, see at once the true connection.

  In every respect, therefore, his “Witches” are an echo from the
  ancient Germanic creed--an echo, moreover, coming to us in the
  oldest Teutonic verse-form; that is, in the staff-rime.

      KARL BLIND.

ELVES. The elves of later times seem a sort of middle thing between the
light and dark elves. They are fair and lively, but also bad and
mischievous. In some parts of Norway the peasants describe them as
diminutive naked boys with hats on. Traces of their dance are sometimes
to be seen on the wet grass, especially on the banks of rivers. Their
exhalation is injurious, and is called _alfgust_ or _elfblæst_, causing
a swelling, which is easily contracted by too nearly approaching places
where they have spat, etc. They have a predilection for certain spots,
but particularly for large trees, which on that account the owners do
not venture to meddle with, but look on them as something sacred, on
which the weal or woe of the place depends. Certain diseases among their
cattle are attributed to the elves, and are, therefore, called elf-fire
or elf-shot. The dark elves are often confounded with the dwarfs, with
whom they, indeed, seem identical, although they are distinguished in
Odin’s Haven’s Song. The Norwegians also make a distinction between
dwarfs and elves, believing the former to live solitary and in quiet,
while the latter love music and dancing. (Faye, p. 48; quoted by
Thorpe.)

The fairies of Scotland are precisely identical with the above. They are
described as a diminutive race of beings of a mixed or rather dubious
nature, capricious in their dispositions and mischievous in their
resentment. They inhabit the interior of green hills, chiefly those of a
conical form, in Gaelic termed _Sighan_, on which they lead their dances
by moonlight; impressing upon the surface the marks of circles, which
sometimes appear yellow and blasted, sometimes of a deep green hue, and
within which it is dangerous to sleep, or to be found after sunset.
Cattle which are suddenly seized with the cramp, or some similar
disorder, are said to be _elf-shot_. (Scott’s Minstrelsy of the Scottish
Border; quoted by Thorpe.)

Of the Swedish elves, Arndt gives the following sketch: Of giants, of
dwarfs, of the alp, of dragons, that keep watch over treasures, they
have the usual stories; nor are the kindly elves forgotten. How often
has my postillion, when he observed a circular mark in the dewy grass,
exclaimed: See! there the elves have been dancing. These elf-dances play
a great part in the spinning-room. To those who at midnight happen to
enter one of these circles, the elves become visible, and may then play
all kinds of pranks with them; though in general they are little, merry,
harmless beings, both male and female. They often sit in small stones,
that are hollowed out in circular form, and which are called elf-querns
or mill-stones. Their voice is said to be soft like the air. If a loud
cry is heard in the forest, it is that of the Skogsrå (spirit of the
wood), which should be answered only by a _He!_ when it can do no harm.
(Reise durch Sweden; quoted by Thorpe.)

The elf-shot was known in England in very remote times, as appears from
the Anglo-Saxon incantation, printed by Grimm in his Deutsche
Mythologie, and in the appendix to Kemble’s Saxons in England: Gif hit
wœre esa gescot oððe hit wœre ylfa gescot; that is, if it were an
asa-shot or an elf-shot. On this subject Grimm says: It is a very old
belief that dangerous arrows were shot by the elves from the air. The
thunder-bolt is also called elf-shot, and in Scotland a hard, sharp,
wedge-shaped stone is known by the name of elf-arrow, elf-flint,
elf-bolt, which, it is supposed, has been sent by the spirits. (Quoted
by Thorpe.)

CHAPTER VII.

Our ancestors divided the universe into nine worlds, and these again
into three groups:

1. Over the earth. Muspelheim, Ljosalfaheim and Asaheim.

2. On the earth. Jotunheim, Midgard and Vanheim.

3. Below the earth. Svartalfaheim, Niflheim and Niflhel.

The gods had twelve abodes:

1. THRUDHEIM. The abode of Thor. His realm is Thrudvang, and his palace
is Bilskirner.

2. YDALER. Uller’s abode.

3. VALASKJALF. Odin’s hall.

4. SOKVABEK. The abode of Saga.

5. GLADSHEIM, where there are twelve seats for the gods, besides the
throne occupied by Alfather.

6. THRYMHEIM. Skade’s abode.

7. BREIDABLIK. Balder’s abode.

8. HIMMINBJORG. Heimdal’s abode.

9. FOLKVANG. Freyja’s abode.

10. GLITNER. Forsete’s abode.

11. NOATUN. Njord’s abode.

12. LANDVIDE. Vidar’s abode.

According to the Lay of Grimner, the gods had twelve horses, but the
owner of each horse is not given:

(1) Sleipner (Odin’s), (2) Goldtop (Heimdal’s), (3) Glad, (4) Gyller,
(5) Gler, (6) Skeidbrimer, (7) Silvertop, (8) Siner, (9) Gisl, (10)
Falhofner, (11) Lightfoot, (12) Blodughofdi (Frey’s).

The owners of nine of them are not given, and, moreover, it is stated
that Thor had no horse, but always either went on foot or drove his
goats.

The favorite numbers are three, nine and twelve. Monotheism was
recognized in the unknown god, who is from everlasting to everlasting.
A number of trinities were established, and the nine worlds were
classified into three groups. The week had nine days, and originally
there were probably but nine gods, that is, before the vans were united
with the asas. The number nine occurs where Heimdal is said to have nine
mothers, Menglad is said to have nine maid-servants, Æger had nine
daughters, etc. When the vans were united with the asas, the number rose
to twelve:

(1) Odin, (2) Thor, (3) Tyr, (4) Balder, (5) Hoder, (6) Heimdal, (7)
Hermod, (8) Njord, (9) Frey, (10) Uller, (11) Vidar, (12) Forsete.

If we add to this list Brage, Vale and Loke, we get fifteen; but the
Eddas everywhere declare that there are twelve gods, who were entitled
to divine worship.

The number of the goddesses is usually given as twenty-six.

CHAPTER VIII.

Loke and his offspring are so fully treated in our Norse Mythology, that
we content ourselves by referring our readers to that work.

CHAPTER IX.

Freyja’s ornament Brising. In the saga of Olaf Tryggvason, there is a
rather awkward story of the manner in which Freyja became possessed of
her ornament. Freyja, it is told, was a mistress of Odin. Not far from
the palace dwelt four dwarfs, whose names were Alfrig, Dvalin, Berling
and Grer; they were skillful smiths. Looking one day into their stony
dwelling, Freyja saw them at work on a beautiful golden necklace, or
collar, which she offered to buy, but which they refused to part with,
except on conditions quite incompatible with the fidelity she owed to
Odin, but to which she, nevertheless, was tempted to accede. Thus the
ornament became hers. By some means this transaction came to the
knowledge of Loke, who told it to Odin. Odin commanded him to get
possession of the ornament. This was no easy task, for no one could
enter Freyja’s bower without her consent. He went away whimpering, but
most were glad on seeing him in such tribulation. When he came to the
locked bower, he could nowhere find an entrance, and, it being cold
weather, he began to shiver. He then transformed himself into a fly and
tried every opening, but in vain; there was nowhere air enough to make
him to get through [Loke (fire) requires air]. At length he found a hole
in the roof, but not bigger than the prick of a needle. Through this he
slipt. On his entrance he looked around to see if anyone were awake, but
all were buried in sleep. He peeped in at Freyja’s bed, and saw that she
had the ornament round her neck, but that the lock was on the side she
lay on. He then transformed himself to a flea, placed himself on
Freyja’s cheek, and stung her so that she awoke, but only turned herself
round and slept again. He then laid aside his assumed form, cautiously
took the ornament, unlocked the bower, and took his prize to Odin. In
the morning, on waking, Freyja seeing the door open, without having been
forced, and that her ornament was gone, instantly understood the whole
affair. Having dressed herself, she repaired to Odin’s hall, and
upbraided him with having stolen her ornament, and insisted on its
restoration, which she finally obtained. (Quoted by Thorpe.)

Mention is also made of the Brósinga-men in the Beowulf (verse 2394).
Here it is represented as belonging to Hermanric, but the legend
concerning it has never been found.

CHAPTER X.

This myth about Frey and Gerd is the subject of one of the most
fascinating poems in the Elder Edda, the Journey of Skirner. It is, as
Auber Forestier, in Echoes from Mistland, says, the germ of the Niblung
story. Frey is Sigurd or Sigfrid, and Gerd is Brynhild. The myth is also
found in another poem of the Elder Edda, the Lay of Fjolsvin, in which
the god himself--there called Svipday (the hastener of the
day)--undertakes the journey to arouse from the winter sleep the cold
giant nature of the maiden Menglad (the sun-radiant daughter), who is
identical with Freyja (the goddess of spring, promise, or of love
between man and woman, and who can easily be compared with Gerd). Before
the bonds which enchain the maiden can in either case be broken, Bele
(the giant of spring storms, corresponding to the dragon Fafner in the
Niblung story,) must be conquered, and Wafurloge (the wall of bickering
flames that surrounded the castle) must be penetrated. The fanes
symbolize the funeral pyre, for whoever enters the nether world must
scorn the fear of death. (Auber Forestier’s Echoes from Mistland;
Introduction, xliii, xliv.) We also find this story repeated again and
again, in numberless variations, in Teutonic folk-lore; for instance,
in The Maiden on the Glass Mountain, where the glass mountain takes the
place of the bickering flame.

CHAPTER XI.

The tree Lerad (furnishing protection) must be regarded as a branch of
Ygdrasil.

CHAPTER XII.

In Heimskringla Skidbladner is called Odin’s ship. This is correct. All
that belonged to the gods was his also.

CHAPTER XIII.

For a thorough analysis of Thor as a spring god, as the god who dwells
in the clouds, as the god of thunder and lightning, as the god of
agriculture, in short, as the god of culture, we can do no better than
to refer our readers to Der Mythus von Thor, nach Nordischen Quellen,
von Ludwig Uhland, Stuttgart, 1836; and to Handbuch der Deutschen
Mythologie, mit Einschluss der Nordischen, von Karl Simrock, Vierte
Auflage, Bonn, 1874.

CHAPTER XIV.

The death of Balder is justly regarded as the most beautiful myth in
Teutonic mythology. It is connected with the Lay of Vegtam in the Elder
Edda. Like so many other myths (Frey and Gerd, The Robbing of Idun,
etc.) the myth symbolizes originally the end of summer and return of
spring. Thus Balder dies every year and goes to Hel. But in the
following spring he returns to the asas, and gladdens all things living
and dead with his pure shining light. Gradually, however, the myth was
changed from a symbol of the departing and returning summer, and applied
to the departing and returning of the world year, and thus the death of
Balder prepares the way for Ragnarok and Regeneration. Balder goes to
Hel and does not return to this world. Thokk refuses to weep for him.
His return is promised after Ragnarok. The next spring does not bring
him back, but the rejuvenated earth. Thus the death of Balder becomes
the central thought in the drama of the fate of the gods and of the
world. It is inseparably connected with the punishment of Loke and the
twilight of the gods. The winter following the death of Balder is not an
ordinary winter, but the Fimbul-winter, which is followed by no summer,
but by the destruction of the world. The central idea in the Odinic
religion, the destruction and regeneration of the world, has taken this
beautiful sun-myth of Balder into its service. Balder is then no more
merely the pure holy light of heaven; he symbolizes at the same time the
purity and innocence of the gods; he is changed from a physical to an
ethical myth. He impersonated all that was good and holy in the life of
the gods; and so it came to pass that when the golden age had ceased,
when thirst for gold (Gulveig), when sin and crime had come into the
world, he was too good to live in it. As in Genesis fratricide (Cain and
Abel) followed upon the eating of the forbidden fruit, and the loss of
paradise; so, when the golden age (paradise) had ended among the asas,
Loke (the serpent) brought fratricide (Hoder and Balder) among the gods;
themselves and our ancestors regarded fratricide as the lowest depth of
moral depravity. After the death of Balder

  Brothers slay brothers,
  Sisters’ children
  Shed each other’s blood,
  Hard grows the world,
  Sensual sin waxes huge.

  There are sword-ages, ax-ages--
  Shields are cleft in twain,--
  Storm-ages, murder-ages,--
  Till the world falls dead,
  And men no longer spare
  Or pity one another.

Upon the whole we may say that a sun-myth first represents the death of
the day at sunset, when the sky is radiant as if dyed in blood. In the
flushing morn light wins its victory again. Then this same myth becomes
transferred to the death and birth of summer. Once more it is lifted
into a higher sphere, while still holding on to its physical
interpretation, and is applied to the world year. Finally, it is clothed
with ethical attributes, becomes thoroughly anthropomorphized, and
typifies the good and the evil, the virtues and vices (light and
darkness), in the character and life of gods and of men. Thus we get
four stages in the development of the myth.

CHAPTER XV.

RAGNAROK. The word is found written in two ways, Ragnarok and ragnarökr.
Ragna is genitive plural, from the word regin (god), and means of the
gods. Rok means reason, ground, origin, a wonder, sign, marvel. It is
allied to the O.H.G. _rahha_ = sentence, judgment. Ragnarök would then
mean _the history of the gods_, and applied to the dissolution of the
world, might be translated _the last judgment_, _doomsday_, _weird of
gods and the world_. Rokr means _twilight_, and Ragnarokr, as the
Younger Edda has it, thus means _the twilight of the gods_, and the
latter is adopted by nearly all modern writers, although Gudbr.
Vigfusson declares that Ragnarok (doomsday) is no doubt the correct
form. And this is also to be said in favor of doomsday, that Ragnarok
does not involve only the _twilight_, but the whole _night_ of the gods
and the world.


THE NIFLUNGS AND GJUKUNGS.

This chapter of _Skaldskaparmal_ contains much valuable material for a
correct understanding of the Nibelungen-Lied, especially as to the
origin of the Niblung hoard, and the true character of Brynhild. The
material given here, and in the Icelandic Volsunga Saga, has been used
by Wm. Morris in his Sigurd the Volsung and the Fall of the Niblungs.
In the Nibelungen-Lied, as transposed by Auber Forestier, in Echoes from
Mist-Land, we have a perfect gem of literature from the middle high
German period, but its author had lost sight of the divine and mythical
origin of the material that he wove into his poem. It is only by
combining the German Nibelungen-Lied with the mythical materials found
in Norseland that our national Teutonic epic can be restored to us.
Wagner has done this for us in his famous drama; Jordan has done it in
his Sigfrid’s saga; Morris has done it in the work mentioned above; but
will not Auber Forestier gather up all the scattered fragments relating
to Sigurd and Brynhild, and weave them together into a prose narrative,
that shall delight the young and the old of this great land?

We are glad to welcome at this time a new book in the field of Niblung
literature. We refer to Geibel’s Brunhild, translated, with introduction
and notes, by Prof. G. Theo. Dippold, and recently published in Boston.


MENJA AND FENJA.

This is usually called the peace of Frode, which corresponds to the
golden age in the life of the asas. Avarice is the root of crime, and
all other evils. Avarice is at the bottom of all the endless woes of the
Niblung story. The myth explaining why the sea is salt is told in a
variety of forms in different countries. In Germany there are several
folk-lore stories and traditions in regard to it. In Norway, where
folk-lore tales are so abundant, we find the myth about Menja and Fenja
recurring in the following form:


WHY THE SEA IS SALT.

Long, long ago there were two brothers, the one was rich and the other
was poor. On Christmas eve the poor one had not a morsel of bread or
meat in his house, and so he went to his brother and asked him for
mercy’s sake to give him something for Christmas. It was not the first
time the brother had had to give him, and he was not very much pleased
to see him this time either.

“If you will do what I ask of you, I will give you a whole ham of pork,”
said he.

The poor man promised immediately, and was very thankful besides.

“There you have it, now go to hell,” said the rich one, and threw the
ham at him.

“What I have promised, I suppose, I must keep,” said the other. He took
the ham and started. He walked and walked the whole day, and at twilight
he came to a place where everything looked so bright and splendid.

“This must be the place,” thought the man with the ham.

Out in the wood-shed stood an old man with a long white beard, cutting
wood for Christmas.

“Good evening,” said the man with the ham.

“Good evening, sir. Where are you going so late?” said the man.

“I am on my way to hell, if I am on the right road,” said the poor man.

“Yes, you have taken the right road; it is here,” said the old man. “Now
when you get in, they will all want to buy your ham, for pork is rare
food in hell; but you must not sell it, unless you get the hand-mill
that stands back of the door for it. When you come out again I will show
you how to regulate it. You will find it useful in more than one
respect.”

The man with the ham thanked the old man for this valuable information,
and rapped at the devil’s door.

When he came in it happened as the old man had said. All the devils,
both the large ones and the small ones, crowded around him like ants
around a worm, and the one bid higher than the other for the ham.

“It is true my wife and I were to have it for our Christmas dinner, but,
seeing that you are so eager for it, I suppose I will have to let you
have it,” said the man. “But if I am to sell it, I want that hand-mill
that stands behind the door there for it.”

The devil did not like to spare it, and kept dickering and bantering
with the man, but he insisted, and so the devil had to give him the
hand-mill. When the man came out in the yard he asked the old
wood-chopper how he should regulate the mill; and when he had learned
how to do it, he said “thank you,” and made for home as fast as he
could. But still he did not reach home before twelve o’clock in the
night Christmas eve.

“Why, where in the world have you been?” said the woman. “Here I have
been sitting hour after hour waiting and waiting, and I haven’t as much
as two sticks to put on the fire so as to cook the Christmas porridge.”

“Oh, I could not come any sooner. I had several errands to do, and I had
a long way to go too. But now I will show you,” said the man. He set the
mill on the table, and had it first grind light, then a table-cloth,
then food and ale and all sorts of good things for Christmas, and as he
commanded the mill ground. The woman expressed her great astonishment
again and again, and wanted to know where her husband had gotten the
mill, but this he would not tell.

“It makes no difference where I have gotten it; you see the mill is a
good one, and that the water does not freeze,” said the man.

Then he ground food and drink, and all good things, for the whole
Christmas week, and on the third day he invited his friends: he was
going to have a party. When the rich brother saw all the nice and good
things at the party, he became very wroth, for he could not bear to see
his brother have anything.

“Christmas eve he was so needy that he came to me and asked me for
mercy’s sake to give him a little food, and now he gives a feast as
though he were both count and king,” said he to the others.

“But where in hell have you gotten all your riches from?” said he to his
brother.

“Behind the door,” answered he who owned the mill. He did not care to
give any definite account, but later in the evening, when he began to
get a little tipsy, he could not help himself and brought out the mill.

“There you see the one that has given me all the riches,” said he, and
then he let the mill grind both one thing and another. When the brother
saw this he was bound to have the mill, and after a long bantering about
it, he finally was to have it; but he was to pay three hundred dollars
for it, and his brother was to keep it until harvest.

“When I keep it until then, I shall have ground food enough to last many
years,” thought he.

Of course the mill got no chance to grow rusty during the next six
months, and when harvest-time came, the rich brother got it; but the
other man had taken good care not to show him how to regulate it. It was
in the evening that the rich man brought the mill home, and in the
morning he bade his wife go and spread the hay after the mowers,--he
would get dinner ready, he said. Toward dinner he put the mill on the
table.

“Grind fish and gruel: Grind both well and fast!” said the man, and the
mill began to grind fish and gruel. It first filled all the dishes and
tubs full, and after that it covered the whole floor with fish and
gruel. The man kept puttering and tinkering, and tried to get the mill
to stop; but no matter how he turned it and fingered at it, the mill
kept on, and before long the gruel got so deep in the room that the man
was on the point of drowning. Then he opened the door to the
sitting-room, but before long that room was filled too, and the man had
all he could do to get hold of the door-latch down in this flood of
gruel. When he got the door open he did not remain long in the room. He
ran out as fast as he could, and there was a perfect flood of fish gruel
behind, deluging the yard and his fields.

The wife, who was in the meadow making hay, began to think that it took
a long time to get dinner ready. “Even if husband does not call us, we
will have to go anyway. I suppose he does not know much about making
gruel; I will have to go and help him,” said the woman to the mowers.

They went homeward, but on coming up the hill they met the flood of fish
and gruel and bread, the one mixed up with the other, and the man came
running ahead of the flood.

“Would that each one of you had an hundred stomachs, but have a care
that you do not drown in the gruel flood,” cried the husband. He ran by
them as though the devil had been after him, and hastened down to his
brother. He begged him in the name of everything sacred to come and take
the mill away immediately.

“If it grinds another hour the whole settlement will perish in fish and
gruel,” said he.

But the brother would not take it unless he got three hundred dollars,
and this money had to be paid to him.

Now the poor brother had both money and the mill, and so it did not take
long before he got himself a farm, and a much nicer one than his
brother’s. With his mill he ground out so much gold that he covered his
house all over with sheets of gold. The house stood down by the
sea-shore, and it glistened far out upon the sea. All who sailed past
had to go ashore and visit the rich man in the golden house, and all
wanted to see the wonderful mill, for its fame spread far and wide, and
there was none who had not heard speak of it.

After a long time there came a sea-captain who wished to see the mill.
He asked whether it could grind salt.

“Yes, it can grind salt,” said he who owned the mill; and when the
captain heard this, he was bound to have it, let it cost what it will.
For if he had that, thought he, he would not have to sail far off over
dangerous waters after cargoes of salt. At first the man did not wish to
sell it, but the captain teased and begged and finally the man sold it,
and got many thousand dollars for it. When the captain had gotten the
mill on his back, he did not stay there long, for he was afraid the man
might reconsider the bargain and back out again. He had no time to ask
how to regulate it; he went to his ship as fast as he could, and when he
had gotten some distance out upon the sea, he got his mill out.

“Grind salt both fast and well,” said the captain. The mill began to
grind salt, and that with all its might. When the captain had gotten the
ship full he wanted to stop the mill; but no matter how he worked, and
no matter how he handled it, the mill kept grinding as fast as ever, and
the heap of salt kept growing larger and larger, and at last the ship
sank. The mill stands on the bottom of the sea grinding this very day,
and so it comes that the sea is salt.




VOCABULARY.


ADILS. A king who reigned in Upsala.
AE. A dwarf.
ÆGER. The god presiding over the stormy sea.
ALF. A dwarf.
ALFATHER. A name of Odin.
ALFHEIM. The home of the elves.
ALFRIG. A dwarf.
ALSVID. One of the horses of the sun.
ALTHJOF. A dwarf.
ALVIS. A dwarf.
AMSVARTNER. The name of the lake in which the island was situated where
  the wolf Fenrer was chained.
ANDHRIMNER. The cook in Valhal.
ANDLANG. The second heaven.
ANDVARE. A dwarf.
ANDVARE-NAUT. The ring in the Niblung story.
ANGERBODA. A giantess; mother of the Fenris-wolf.
ANNAR. Husband of Night and father of Jord.
ARVAK. The name of one of the horses of the sun.
ASAHEIM. The home of the asas.
ASALAND. The land of the asas.
ASAS. The Teutonic gods.
ASA-THOR. A common name for Thor.
ASGARD. The residence of the gods.
ASK. The name of the first man created by Odin, Honer and Loder.
ASLAUG. Daughter of Sigurd and Brynhild.
ASMUND. A man visited by Odin.
ASYNJES. The Teutonic goddesses.
ATLE. Gudrun’s husband after the death of Sigurd.
ATRID. A name of Odin.
AUD. The son of Night and Naglfare.
AUDHUMBLA. The cow that nourished the giant Ymer.
AUDUN. A name derived from Odin.
AURGELMER. A giant; grandfather of Bergelmer; the same as Ymer.
AURVANG. A dwarf.
AUSTRE. A dwarf.

BAFUR. A dwarf.
BALDER. Son of Odin and Frigg, slain by Hoder.
BALEYG. A name of Odin.
BAR-ISLE. A cool grove in which Gerd agreed with Skirner to meet Frey.
BAUGE. A brother of Suttung. Odin worked for him one summer, in order to
  get his help in obtaining Suttung’s mead of poetry.
BEIGUD. One of Rolf Krake’s berserks.
BELE. A giant, brother of Gerd, slain by Frey.
BERGELMER. A giant; son of Thrudgelmer and grandson of Aurgelmer.
BERLING. A dwarf.
BESTLA. Wife of Bure and mother of Odin.
BIFLIDE. A name of Odin.
BIFLINDE. A name of Odin.
BIFROST. The rainbow.
BIFUR. A dwarf.
BIKKE. A minister of Jormunrek; causes Randver to be hanged, and
  Svanhild trodden to death by horses.
BIL. One of the children that accompany Moon.
BILEYG. A name of Odin.
BILSKIRNER. Thor’s abode.
BLAIN. A dwarf.
BLODUGHOFDE. Frey’s horse.
BODN. One of the three jars in which the poetic mead is kept.
BODVAR BJARKE. One of Rolf Krake’s berserks.
BOL. One of the rivers flowing out of Hvergelmer.
BOLTHORN. A giant; father of Bestla, mother of Odin.
BOLVERK. A name of Odin.
BOMBUR. A dwarf.
BOR. Son of Bure; father of Odin.
BRAGE. A son of Odin; the best of skalds.
BREIDABLIK. The abode of Balder.
BRIMER. One of the heavenly halls after Ragnarok.
BRISING. Freyja’s necklace.
BROK. A dwarf.
BRYNHILD. One of the chief heroines in the Niblung story.
BUDLE. Father of Atle and Brynhild.
BUE. A son of Vesete, who settled in Borgundarholm.
BURE. Grandfather of Odin.
BYLEIST. A brother of Loke.
BYRGER. A well from which Bil and Hjuke were going when they were taken
  by Moon.

DAIN. A dwarf.
DAIN. One of the stags that bite the leaves of Ygdrasil.
DAINSLEIF. Hogne’s sword.
DAY. Son of Delling.
DAYBREAK. The father of Day.
DELLING. Daybreak.
DOLGTHVARE. A dwarf.
DORE. A dwarf.
DRAUPNER. Odin’s ring.
DROME. One of the fetters with which the Fenris-wolf was chained.
DUF. A dwarf.
DUNEY. One of the stags that bite the leaves of Ygdrasil.
DURATHRO. One of the stags that bite the leaves of Ygdrasil.
DURIN. A dwarf.
DVALIN. One of the stags that bite the leaves of Ygdrasil.
DVALIN. A dwarf.

EIKINSKJALDE. A dwarf.
EIKTHYRNER. A hart that stands over Odin’s hall.
EILIF. Son of Gudrun; a skald.
EIMYRJA. One of the daughters of Haloge and Glod.
EINDRIDE. A name of Thor.
EIR. An attendant of Menglod, and the best of all in the healing art.
EKIN. One of the rivers flowing from Hvergelmer.
ELDER. A servant of Æger.
ELDHRIMNER. The kettle in which the boar Sahrimner is cooked in Valhal.
ELIVOGS. The ice-cold streams that flow out of Niflheim.
ELJUDNER. Hel’s hall.
ELLE. An old woman (old age) with whom Thor wrestled in Jotunheim.
EMBLA. The first woman created by Odin, Honer and Loder.
ENDIL. The name of a giant.
ERP. A son of Jonaker, murdered by Sorle and Hamder.
EYLIME. The father of Hjordis, mother of Volsung.
EYSA. One of the daughters of Haloge and Glod.

FAFNER. Son of Hreidmar, killed by Sigurd.
FAL. A dwarf.
FALHOFNER. One of the horses of the gods.
FARBAUTE. The father of Loke.
FARMAGOD. One of the names of Odin.
FARMATYR. One of the names of Odin.
FENJA. A female slave who ground at Frode’s mill.
FENRIS-WOLF. The monster wolf, son of Loke.
FENSALER. The abode of Frigg.
FID. A dwarf.
FILE. A dwarf.
FIMAFENG. Æger’s servant.
FIMBUL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
FIMBULTHUL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
FIMBUL-TYR. The unknown god.
FIMBUL-WINTER. The great and awful winter of three years duration
  preceding Ragnarok.
FINNSLEIF. A byrnie belonging to King Adils, of Upsala.
FJALAR. A dwarf.
FJOLNER. A name of Odin.
FJOLSVID. A name of Odin.
FJORGVIN. The mother of Frigg and of Thor.
FJORM. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
FOLKVANG. Freyja’s abode.
FORM. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
FORNJOT. The ancient giant; the father of Æger.
FORSETE. The peace-maker; son of Balder and Nanna.
FRANANGER FORCE. The waterfall into which Loke cast himself in the
  likeness of a salmon.
FREKE. One of Odin’s wolves.
FREY. Son of Njord and husband of Skade.
FREYJA. The daughter of Njord and sister of Frey.
FRIDLEIF. A son of Skjold.
FRIGG. Wife of Odin and mother of the gods.
FRODE. Grandson of Skjold.
FROSTE. A dwarf.
FULLA. Frigg’s attendant.
FUNDIN. A dwarf.
FYRE. A river in Sweden.

GAGNRAD. A name of Odin.
GALAR. A dwarf.
GANDOLF. A dwarf.
GANG. A giant.
GANGLARE. A name of Odin.
GANGLATE. Hel’s man-servant.
GANGLERE. A name of Odin.
GANGLOT. Hel’s maid-servant.
GANGRAD. A name of Odin.
GARDROFA. A horse.
GARM. A dog that barks at Ragnarok.
GAUT. A name of Odin.
GEFJUN. A goddess; she is present at Æger’s feast.
GEFN. One of the names of Freyja.
GEIRAHOD. A valkyrie.
GEIRROD. A giant visited by Thor.
GEIR SKOGUL. A valkyrie.
GEIRVIMUL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
GELGJA. The fetter with which the Fenris-wolf was chained.
GERD. A beautiful giantess, daughter of Gymer.
GERE. One of Odin’s wolves.
GERSAME. One of the daughters of Freyja.
GILLING. Father of Suttung, who possessed the poetic mead.
GIMLE. The abode of the righteous after Ragnarok.
GINNAR. A dwarf.
GINUNGAGAP. The premundane abyss.
GIPUL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
GISL. One of the horses of the gods.
GJALLAR-BRIDGE. The bridge across the river Gjol, near Helheim.
GJALLAR-HORN. Heimdal’s horn.
GJALLAR-RIVER. The river near Helheim.
GJALP. One of the daughters of Geirrod.
GJUKE. A king in Germany, visited by Sigurd.
GLADSHEIM. Odin’s dwelling.
GLAM. The name of a giant.
GLAPSVID. A name of Odin.
GLASER. A grove in Asgard.
GLEIPNER. The last fetter with which the wolf Fenrer was bound.
GLENER. The husband of Sol (sun).
GLER. One of the horses of the gods.
GLITNER. Forsete’s hall.
GLOIN. A dwarf.
GNA. Frigg’s messenger.
GNIPA-CAVE. The cave before which the dog Garm barks.
GNITA-HEATH. Fafner’s abode, where he kept the treasure of the Niblungs.
GOIN. A serpent under Ygdrasil.
GOL. A valkyrie.
GOLDFAX. The giant Hrungner’s horse.
GOMUL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
GONDLER. One of the names of Odin.
GONDUL. A valkyrie.
GOPUL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
GOT. A name of Odin.
GOTE. Gunnar’s horse.
GOTHORM. A son of Gjuke; murders Sigurd, and is slain by him.
GRABAK. One of the serpents under Ygdrasil.
GRAD. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
GRAFVITNER. A serpent under Ygdrasil.
GRAFVOLLUD. A serpent under Ygdrasil.
GRAM. Sigurd’s sword.
GRANE. Sigurd’s horse.
GREIP. One of the daughters of Geirrod.
GRID. A giantess visited by Thor.
GRIDARVOL. Grid’s staff.
GRIM. A name of Odin.
GRIMHILD. Gjuke’s queen.
GRIMNER. One of the names of Odin.
GRJOTTUNGARD. The place where Thor fought with Hrungner.
GROA. A giantess, mother of Orvandel.
GROTTE. The name of King Frode’s mill.
GUD. A valkyrie.
GUDNY. One of the children of Gjuke.
GUDRUN. The famous daughter of Gjuke.
GULLINBURSTE. The name of Frey’s boar.
GULLINTANNE. A name of Heimdal.
GULLTOP. Heimdal’s horse.
GULLVEIG. A personification of gold; she is pierced and burnt.
GUNGNER. Odin’s spear.
GUNLAT. The daughter of the giant Suttung.
GUNN. A valkyrie.
GUNNAR. The famous son of Gjuke.
GUNTHRAIN. One of the rivers flowing from Hvergelmer.
GWODAN. An old name for Odin.
GYLFE. A king of Svithjod, who visited Asgard under the name of
  Ganglere.
GYLLER. One of the horses of the gods.
GYMER. Another name of the ocean divinity Æger.

HABROK. A celebrated hero.
HALLINSKIDE. Another name of Heimdal.
HALOGE. A giant, son of Fornjot; also called Loge.
HAMDER. Son of Jonaker and Gudrun, incited by his mother to avenge his
  sister’s death.
HAMSKERPER. A horse; the sire of Hofvarpner, which was Gna’s horse.
HANGAGOD. A name of Odin.
HANGATYR. A name of Odin.
HAPTAGOD. A name of Odin.
HAR. The High One; applied to Odin.
HARBARD. A name assumed by Odin.
HATE. The wolf bounding before the sun, and will at last catch the moon.
HEIDE. Another name for Gullveig.
HEIDRUN. A goat that stands over Valhal.
HEIMDAL. The god of the rainbow.
HEIMER. Brynhild’s foster-father.
HEL. The goddess of death; daughter of Loke.
HELBLINDE. A name of Odin.
HELMET-BEARER. A name of Odin.
HENGEKJAPT. The man to whom King Frode gave his mill.
HEPTE. A dwarf.
HERAN. A name of Odin.
HERFATHER. A name of Odin.
HERJAN. A name of Odin.
HERMOD. The god who rode on Sleipner to Hel, to get Balder back.
HERTEIT. A name of Odin.
HILD. A valkyrie.
HILDESVIN. A helmet, which King Adils took from King Ale.
HIMINBJORG. Heimdal’s dwelling.
HINDFELL. The place where Brynhild sat in her hall, surrounded by the
  Vafurloge.
HJALMBORE. A name of Odin.
HJALPREK. A king in Denmark; collects a fleet for Sigurd.
HJATLE THE VALIANT. One of Rolf Krake’s berserks.
HJORDIS. Married to Sigmund, and mother of Sigurd.
HJUKE. One of the children that accompany Moon.
HLEDJOLF. A dwarf.
HLER. Another name of Æger.
HLIDSKJALF. The seat of Odin, whence he looked out over all the world.
HLIN. One of the attendants of Frigg; Frigg herself is sometimes called
  by this name.
HLODYN. Thor’s mother.
HLOK. A valkyrie.
HLORIDE. A name of Thor.
HNIKER. A name of Odin.
HNIKUD. A name of Odin.
HNITBJORG. The place where Suttung hid the poetic mead.
HNOS. Freyja’s daughter.
HODER. The slayer of Balder; he is blind.
HODMIMER’S-HOLT. The grove where the two human beings, Lif and
  Lifthraser, were preserved during Ragnarok.
HOFVARPNER. Gna’s horse.
HOGNE. A son of Gjuke.
HONER. One of the three creating gods; with Odin and Loder he creates
  Ask and Embla.
HOR. A dwarf.
HORN. A name of Freyja.
HRASVELG. A giant in an eagle’s plumage, who produces the wind.
HREIDMAR. The father of Regin and Fafner.
HRIB. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
HRIMFAXE. The horse of Night.
HRINGHORN. The ship upon which Balder’s body was burned.
HRIST. A valkyrie.
HRODVITNER. A wolf; father of the wolf Hate.
HRON. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
HROPTATYR. A name of Odin.
HROTTE. Fafner’s sword.
HRUNGNER. A giant; Thor slew him.
HRYM. A giant, who steers the ship Naglfar at Ragnarok.
HVERGELMER. The fountain in the middle of Niflheim.
HUGE. A person (Thought) who ran a race with Thjalfe, in Jotunheim.
HUGIST. One of Odin’s ravens.
HUGSTORE. A dwarf.
HYMER. A giant with whom Thor went fishing when he caught the
  Midgard-serpent.
HYNDLA. A vala visited by Freyja.
HYRROKEN. A giantess who launched the ship on which Balder was burned.

IDA. A plain where the gods first assemble, and where they assemble
  again after Ragnarok.
IDAVOLD. The same.
IDE. A giant, son of Olvalde.
IDUN. Wife of Brage; she kept the rejuvenating apples.
IRONWOOD. The abode of giantesses called Jarnveds.
IVA. A river in Jotunheim.
IVALD. The father of the dwarfs that made Sif’s hair, the ship
  Skidbladner, and Odin’s spear Gungner.

JAFNHAR. A name of Odin.
JALG. A name of Odin.
JALK. A name of Odin.
JARNSAXA. One of Heimdal’s nine giant mothers.
JARNVED. The same as Ironwood.
JARNVIDJES. The giantesses dwelling in Ironwood.
JORD. Wife of Odin, mother of Thor.
JORMUNGAND. The Midgard-serpent.
JORMUNREK. King of Goths, marries Svanhild.
JORUVOLD. The country where Aurvang is situated. Thence come several
  dwarfs.
JOTUNHEIM. The home of the giants.

KERLAUGS. The rivers that Thor every day must cross.
KILE. A dwarf.
KJALER. A name of Odin.
KORMT. A river which Thor every day must cross.
KVASER. The hostage given by the vans to the asas; his blood, when
  slain, was the poetical meed kept by Suttung.

LADING. One of the fetters with which the Fenris-wolf was bound.
LANDVIDE. Vidar’s abode.
LAUFEY. Loke’s mother.
LEIPT. One of the rivers flowing out of Hvergelmer.
LERAD. A tree near Valhal.
LETFET. One of the horses of the gods.
LIF.       } The two persons preserved in Hodmimer’s-holt during
LIFTHRASER.}   Ragnarok.
LIT. A dwarf.
LJOSALFAHEIM. The home of the light elves.
LODER. One of the three gods who created Ask and Embla.
LOFN. One of the asynjes.
LOGE. A giant who tried his strength at eating with Loke in Jotunheim.
LOKE. The giant-god of the Norse mythology.
LOPT. Another name for Loke.
LOVAR. A dwarf.
LYNGVE. The island where the Fenris-wolf was chained.

MAGNE. A son of Thor.
MANNHEIM. The home of man; our earth.
MARDOL. One of the names of Freyja.
MEGINGJARDER. Thor’s belt.
MEILE. A son of Odin.
MENGLAD. Svipdag’s betrothed.
MENJA. A female slave who ground at Frode’s mill.
MIDGARD. The name of the earth in the mythology.
MIDVITNE. A giant.
MIMER. The name of the wise giant; keeper of the holy well.
MIST. A valkyrie.
MJODVITNER. A dwarf.
MJOLNER. Thorn’s hammer.
MJOTUD. A name of Odin.
MODE. One of Thor’s sons.
MODGUD. The may who guards the Gjallar-bridge.
MODSOGNER. A dwarf.
MOIN. A serpent under Ygdrasil.
MOKKERKALFE. A clay giant in the myth of Thor and Hrungner.
MOON, brother of Sun. Both children of Mundilfare.
MOONGARM. A wolf of Loke’s offspring; he devours the moon.
MORN. A troll-woman.
MUNDILFARE. Father of the sun and moon.
MUNIN. One of Odin’s ravens.
MUSPEL. The name of an abode of fire.
MUSPELHEIM. The world of blazing light before the creation.

NA. A dwarf.
NAGLFAR. A mythical ship made of nail-parings; it appears in Ragnarok.
NAIN. A dwarf.
NAL. Mother of Loke.
NANNA. Daughter of Nep; mother of Forsete, and wife of Balder.
NARE. Sod of Loke; also called Narfe.
NARFE. _See_ Nare.
NASTRAND. A place of punishment for the wicked after Ragnarok.
NEP. Father of Nanna.
NIBLUNGS. Identical with Gjukungs.
NIDA MOUNTAINS. A place where there is, after Ragnarok, a golden hall
  for the race of Sindre (the dwarfs).
NIDE. A dwarf.
NIDHUG. A serpent in the nether world.
NIFLHEIM. The world of mist before the creation.
NIFLUNGS. Identical with Niblungs.
NIGHT. Daughter of Norfe.
NIKAR. A name of Odin.
NIKUZ. A name of Odin.
NIPING. A dwarf.
NJORD. A van; husband of Skade, and father of Frey and Freyja.
NOATUN. Njord’s dwelling.
NON. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
NOR. The man after whom Norway was supposed to have been named.
NORDRE. A dwarf.
NORFE. A giant, father of Night.
NORNS. The weird sisters.
NOT. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
NY. A dwarf.
NYE. A dwarf.
NYRAD. A dwarf.

ODER. Freyja’s husband.
ODIN. Son of Bor and Bestla; the chief of Teutonic gods.
ODRARER. One of the vessels in which the poetic mead was kept.
OFNER. A serpent under Ygdrasil.
OIN. A dwarf.
OKU-THOR. A name of Thor.
OLVALDE. A giant; father of Thjasse, Ide and Gang.
OME. A name of Odin.
ONAR. A dwarf.
ORBODA. Wife of the giant Gymer.
ORE. A dwarf.
ORMT. One of the rivers that Thor has to cross.
ORNER. The name of a giant.
ORVANDEL. The husband of Groa, the vala who sang magic songs over Thor
  after he had fought with Hrungner.
OSKE. A name of Odin.
OTTER. A son of Hreidmar; in the form of an otter he was killed by Loke.

QUASER. _See_ Kvaser.

RADGRID. A valkyrie.
RADSVID. A dwarf.
RAFNAGUD. A name of Odin.
RAGNAROK. The last day; the dissolution of the gods and the world; the
  twilight of the gods.
RAN. The goddess of the sea; wife of Æger.
RANDGRID. A valkyrie.
RANDVER. A son of Jormunrek.
RATATOSK. A squirrel in Ygdrasil.
RATE. An auger used by Odin in obtaining the poetic mead.
REGIN. Son of Hreidmar.
REGINLEIF. A valkyrie.
REIDARTYR. A name of Odin.
REK. A dwarf.
RIND. Mother of Vale.
ROGNER. A name of Odin.
ROSKVA. Thor’s maiden follower.

SAHRIMNER. The boar on which the gods and heroes in Valhal live.
SAD. A name of Odin.
SAGA. The goddess of history.
SAGER. The bucket carried by Bil and Hjuke.
SANGETAL. A name of Odin.
SEKIN. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
SESSRYMNER. Freyja’s palace.
SIAR. A dwarf.
SID. A stream flowing from Hvergelmer.
SIDHOT. A name of Odin.
SIDSKEG. A name of Odin.
SIF. Thor’s wife.
SIGFATHER. A name of Odin.
SIGFRID. The hero in the Niblung story; the same as Sigurd.
SIGMUND. Son of Volsung. Also son of Sigurd and Gudrun.
SINDRE. A dwarf.
SIGTYR. A name of Odin.
SIGYN. Loke’s wife.
SIGURD. The hero in the Niblung story; identical with Sigfrid.
SILVERTOP. One of the horses of the gods.
SIMUL. The pole on which Bil and Hjuke carried the bucket.
SINFJOTLE. Son of Sigmund.
SINER. One of the horses of the gods.
SJOFN. One of the asynjes.
SKADE. A giantess; daughter of Thjasse and wife of Njord.
SKEGGOLD. A valkyrie.
SKEIDBRIMER. One of the horses of the gods.
SKIDBLADNER. Frey’s ship.
SKIFID. A dwarf.
SKIFIR. A dwarf.
SKILFING. A name of Odin.
SKINFAXE. The horse of Day.
SKIRNER. Frey’s messenger.
SKOGUL. A valkyrie.
SKOL. The wolf that pursues the sun.
SKRYMER. The name assumed by Utgard-Loke; a giant.
SKULD. The norn of the future.
SLEIPNER. Odin’s eight-footed steed.
SLID. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
SLIDRUGTANNE. Frey’s boar.
SNOTRA. One of the asynjes.
SOKMIMER. A giant slain by Odin.
SOKVABEK. A mansion, where Odin and Saga quaff from golden beakers.
SOL. Daughter of Mundilfare.
SON. One of the vessels containing the poetic mead.
SORLE. Son of Jonaker and Gudrun; avenges the death of Svanhild.
SUDRE. A dwarf.
SUN. Identical with Sol.
SURT. Guards Muspelheim. A fire-giant in Ragnarok.
SUTTUNG. The giant possessing the poetic mead.
SVADE. A giant.
SVADILFARE. A horse, the sire of Sleipner.
SVAFNER. A serpent under Ygdrasil.
SVANHILD. Daughter of Sigurd and Gudrun.
SVARIN. A dwarf.
SVARTALFAHEIM. The home of the swarthy elves.
SVARTHOFDE. The ancestor of all enchanters.
SVASUD. The name of a giant; father of summer.
SVIAGRIS. A ring demanded by the berserks for Rolf Krake.
SVID. A name of Odin.
SVIDAR. A name of Odin.
SVIDR. A name of Odin.
SVIDRE. A name of Odin.
SVIDRIR. A name of Odin.
SVIDUR. A name of Odin.
SVIPDAG. The betrothed of Menglad.
SVIPOL. A name of Odin.
SVOL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
SVOLNE. A name of Odin.
SYLG. A stream flowing from Hvergelmer.
SYN. A minor goddess.
SYR. A name of Freyja.

TANGNJOST.  } Thor’s goats.
TANGRISNER. }
THEK. A dwarf; also a name of Odin.
THJALFE. The name of Thor’s man-servant.
THJASSE. A giant; the father of Njord’s wife, Skade.
THJODNUMA. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
THOK. Loke in the disguise of a woman.
THOL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
THOR. Son of Odin and Fjorgyn. The god of thunder.
THORIN. A dwarf.
THORN. A giant.
THRIDE. A name of Odin.
THRO. A dwarf; also a name of Odin.
THROIN. A dwarf.
THROR. A name of Odin.
THRUD. A valkyrie.
THUD. A name of Odin.
THUL. A stream flowing from Hvergelmer.
THUND. A name of Odin.
THVITE. A stone used in chaining the Fenris-wolf.
THYN. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
TYR. The one-armed god of war.

UD. A name of Odin.
UKKO. The god of thunder in Tshudic mythology.
UKKO-THOR. A name for Thor.
ULLER. Son of Sif and step-son of Thor.
URD. The norn of the past.
UTGARD. The abode of the giant Utgard-Loke.
UTGARD-LOKE. A giant visited by Thor; identical with Skrymer.

VAFTHRUDNER. A giant visited by Odin.
VAFUD. A name of Odin.
VAFURLOGE. The bickering flame surrounding Brynhild on Hindfell.
VAK. A name of Odin.
VALASKJALF. One of Odin’s dwellings.
VALE. Brother of Balder; kills Hoder.
VALFATHER. A name of Odin.
VALHAL. The hall to which Odin invites those slain in battle.
VANADIS. A name of Freyja.
VANAHEIM. The home of the vans.
VAR. The goddess of betrothals and marriages.
VARTARE. The thread with which the mouth of Loke was sewed together.
VASAD. The grandfather of Winter.
VE. A brother of Odin. (Odin, Vile and Ve).
VEDFOLNER. A hawk in Ygdrasil.
VEGSVIN. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
VEGTAM. A name of Odin.
VERATYR. A name of Odin.
VERDANDE. The norn of the present.
VESTRE. A dwarf.
VID. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
VIDAR. Son of Odin and the giantess Grid.
VIDBLAIN. The third heaven.
VIDFIN. The father of Bil and Hjuke.
VIDOLF. The ancestor of the valas.
VIDRER. A name of Odin.
VIDUR. A name of Odin.
VIG. A dwarf.
VIGRID. The field of battle where the gods and the hosts of Surt meet in
  Ragnarok.
VILE. Brother of Odin and Ve.
VILMEIDE. The ancestor of all wizards.
VIMER. A river that Thor crosses.
VIN. A river that flows from Hvergelmer.
VINA. A river that flows from Hvergelmer.
VINDALF. A dwarf.
VINDLONG. One of the names of the father of winter.
VINDSVAL. One of the names of the father of winter.
VINGNER. A name of Thor.
VINGOLF. The palace of the asynjes.
VINGTHOR. A name of Thor.
VIRFIR. A dwarf.
VIT. A dwarf.
VOLSUNGS. The descendants of Volsung.
VON. A river formed by the saliva running from the mouth of the chained
  Fenris-wolf.
VOR. One of the asynjes.

WODAN. A name of Odin.

YDALER. Uller’s dwelling.
YG. A name of Odin.
YGDRASIL. The world-embracing ash-tree.
YLG. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
YMER. The huge giant out of whose body the world was created.




INDEX.

  [Transcriber’s Note:

  Page references in the 5-10 range do not correspond reliably to actual
  citations; pages 5 and 6 do not exist at all. It is possible that the
  Preface was rewritten and repaginated between 1879 (the original date
  of the book) and 1901 (the date of the printing used as the basis for
  this e-text).]


A

Abel, 265.
Academy (London), 252.
Achilleus, 167, 168.
Adam, 33.
Adela, 255.
Adils, 215, 217.
Ae, 71.
Æger, 153, 154, 159, 160, 162, 164, 169, 176-189, 196, 240, 260.
Æneas, 168, 221-224, 229, 242.
Africa and Africans, 36, 38, 225.
Ainbet, 255.
Ainos, 221.
Aldafather, 246.
Ale, 89, 168, 215.
Alf, 71.
Alfather, 65, 69, 72, 77, 80, 81, 92, 94, 98, 106, 245, 246, 259.
Alfheim, 77, 183.
Alfrig, 261.
Alsace, 255.
Alsvid, 66.
Althjof, 70.
Alvis, 251.
America, 30, 244.
Amsvartner, 94.
Anchises, 223, 229.
Andhrimner, 104.
Andlang, 78.
Andvare, 71, 194, 195, 199-201.
Andvarenaut, 200.
Angerboda, 91.
Anglo-Saxon, 258.
Annan, 45.
Annar, 65.
Argulos, 41.
Ariadne, 29.
Ariel, 253.
Ark, 33.
Arndt, 257, 258.
Arvak, 66.
Asaheim, 226, 259.
Asaland, 226, 234.
Asas, 79-90.
Asa-Thor, 241.
Asburg, 226.
Asgard, 6, 7, 51, 54, 64, 65, 69, 133, 136, 148, 153, 156-158, 164,
  168-176, 181, 189, 191, 224, 226, 228, 230, 237.
Asia, 38, 43, 166, 225-229.
Asiamen, 46, 48.
Ask, 5, 64, 243, 250.
Aslaug, 204.
Asmund, 245, 246.
Aspargum, 226.
Asov, 225.
Assor, 229.
Asynjes, 97-100.
Assyrians, 37, 40, 225.
Atlas, 226.
Atle, 198-202, 251.
Atra, 45.
Atrid, 81, 245.
Aud, 65.
Audhumbla, 59, 246.
Audun, 235.
Aurgelmer, 58, 250.
Aurvang, 71.
Austre, 61, 70.
Austria, 255.


B

Baal, 37.
Babylon, 39.
Bafur, 70.
Balder, 6, 7, 8, 46, 83, 84, 89, 131-136, 148, 158, 175, 232, 249, 259,
  260, 264, 265.
Baleyg, 81, 245, 247.
Baltic, 223, 231.
Banquo, 253.
Bar, 61, 64, 250.
Bar-Isle, 102.
Bauge, 162, 163.
Bavaria, 256.
Bedvig, 45.
Beigud, 215.
Bel, 37.
Beldegg, 46.
Bele, 102, 103, 145, 175, 262.
Beowulf, 262.
Bergelmer, 60, 250.
Bergmann, Fr., 18, 221.
Berling, 261.
Bestla, 60, 250.
Biflide, 54.
Biflinde, 54, 81, 245.
Bifrost, 68, 73, 74, 77, 88, 108, 142.
Bifur, 70.
Bikke, 202, 203.
Bil, 66, 99, 250.
Bileyg, 81, 245.
Bilskirner, 82, 259.
Bjaf, 45.
Bjalfe, 233.
Bjar, 45.
Bjarnhedinn, 233.
Black Sea, 225, 229.
Blackwell, W. L., 15, 18.
Blain, 70.
Blind, Karl, 252-256.
Blodughofde, 260.
Blueland, 225, 226.
Bodn, 160-165.
Bodvar Bjarke, 215.
Bol, 106.
Bolthorn, 60, 250.
Bolverk, 81, 162, 163, 245.
Bombur, 70.
Bor, 50, 61, 64, 250.
Borgundarholm, 240.
Bornholm, 240.
Bothnia, 240.
Brage, 6, 9, 16, 25, 50, 87, 108, 153, 154, 159, 160, 164, 166, 169,
  184, 187, 189, 205, 231, 260.
Brander, 46.
Breidablik, 77, 84, 232, 259.
Brimer, 147, 166.
Brising, 97, 186, 261, 262.
Britain, 230.
Brok, 190-192.
Brynhild, 198-201, 262, 267.
Budd, 244.
Buddha, 244.
Budle, 198, 201.
Bue, 240.
Bugge, Sophus, 18.
Bure, 5, 60, 250.
Byleist, 91, 144.
Byrger, 66.


C

Cæsar, 233.
Cain, 265.
Carlyle, Sir Thomas, 22, 252.
Carthage, 31, 242.
Cato, the Elder, 31.
Caucasian, 226.
Celtic, 239, 240, 244.
Cerberos, 41.
Chaldeans, 40.
Chasgar, 226.
China, 28.
Chlotildis, 255.
Christ, 201, 221, 223.
Cicero, 229.
Columbus, 30.
Cottle, A. S., 15.
Crete, 28, 39-42.


D

Dain, 70, 75.
Dainsleif, 219.
Dane, 46.
Danube, 230.
Dardanos, 42.
Dasent, G. W., 15, 16, 18.
Day, 65, 66.
Daybreak, 65.
Delling, 65.
Denmark, 50, 206, 207, 214, 222, 230, 231, 239, 242, 251.
Dido, 242.
Dietrich, Fr., 18.
Dippold, G. Theo., 267.
Dolgthvare, 71.
Don, 225, 229.
Dore, 71.
Dornröschen, 254.
Draupner, 71, 134, 136, 187.
Drome, 93.
Duf, 71.
Duney, 75.
Durathro, 75.
Durin, 70.
Dvalin, 70, 74, 75, 261.


E

Egilsson, S., 18, 19.
Eikenskjalde, 71.
Eikthyrner, 106.
Eilif, 179.
Eimyrja, 240.
Eindride, 175.
Eir, 97.
Ekin, 106.
Elder, 188.
Eldhrimner, 104.
Elenus, 168.
Eline, 251.
Elivogs, 5, 57, 59, 173, 248.
Eljudner, 92.
Elle, 124, 127.
Embla, 5, 64, 243, 250.
Emerson, R. W., 22.
Endil, 180.
Enea, 38, 221, 225.
England, 30, 48, 222, 232, 239, 250, 258.
Erichthonios, 221.
Erp, 202-205.
Ethiopia, 225.
Ettmüller, Ludw., 18.
Europe, 38, 221-230, 241, 254.
Eve, 33.
Eylime, 196.
Eysa, 240.
Eyvind Skaldespiller, 236.


F

Fafner, 193-201, 263.
Fal, 71.
Falhofner, 73, 260.
Farbaute, 91, 185.
Farmagod, 81, 247.
Farmatyr, 81, 165, 245.
Faye, A., 257.
Fenja, 206-208, 267.
Fenris-wolf, 8, 87, 91-96, 104, 141, 142, 148, 149, 168.
Fensaler, 97, 132.
Fid, 71.
File, 71.
Fimafeng, 188.
Fimbul, 56.
Fimbulthul, 106.
Fimbul-tyr, 5, 6, 8.
Fimbul-winter, 7, 140, 264.
Finnish, 239, 240, 241, 250.
Finnsleif, 215.
Fjalar, 160, 161.
Fjarlaf, 45.
Fjolner, 54, 81, 207, 238, 245.
Fjolsvid, 81, 245, 246.
Fjorgvin, 65.
Fjorm, 106.
Folkvang, 86, 259.
Forestier, Auber, 262, 263, 266, 267.
Form, 56, 241.
Fornjot, 239-243.
Forsete, 89, 90, 153, 259, 260.
Frananger Force, 137.
Frankland, 46.
Fraser’s Magazine, 253.
Freke, 105.
Freovit, 46.
Frey, 6, 7, 8, 85, 86, 94, 101-103, 109-112, 134, 142, 143, 153, 187,
  191, 192, 227, 228, 237-239, 243, 260, 262, 264.
Freyja, 6, 7, 29, 85, 86, 97, 110, 134, 153, 157, 170, 183, 187, 228,
  232, 239, 259, 261, 262.
Fridleif, 45, 46, 206, 218.
Frigialand, 168.
Frigg, 6, 7, 43, 45, 65, 80, 94, 97, 98, 131-136, 145, 153, 176, 187,
  227.
Frigia, 43.
Frigida, 45.
Frjodiger, 46.
Frode, 41, 206-213, 238, 267.
Froste, 71, 240, 241.
Fulla, 97, 136, 153, 187.
Fundin, 71.
Funen, 231.
Fyre, 216.
Fyrisvold, 187, 217.


G

Gaelic, 257.
Gagnrad, 247.
Galar, 160, 161.
Gandolf, 70.
Gandvik, 179.
Gang, 159.
Ganglare, 81.
Ganglate, 92.
Ganglere, 245, 246, 247.
Ganglot, 92.
Gangrad, 58.
Gardarike, 230.
Gardie, de la, 17.
Gardrofa, 99.
Garm, 8, 108, 143.
Gaut, 81.
Gave, 46.
Gefjun, 49, 50, 97, 153, 187, 231, 242.
Gefn, 97.
Gegenwart, Die, 252.
Geibel, Em., 267.
Geir, 46.
Geirabod, 99.
Geirrod, 81, 176-183, 245, 246.
Geir Skogul, 252.
Geirvimul, 106.
Gelgja, 96.
Gelmer, 248.
Gerd, 101-113, 153, 228, 238, 262, 265.
Gere, 105, 261.
Germania (of Tacitus), 244.
Germany, 30, 222, 230, 239, 250-256.
Gersame, 238.
Gertraud, 255.
Gibraltar, 225, 230.
Gill, 250.
Gilling, 161.
Gimle, 9, 54, 77, 78, 147, 247.
Ginnar, 71.
Ginungagap, 5, 56, 57, 58, 61, 72, 243, 247-249.
Gipul, 106.
Gisl, 73, 260.
Gissur, Jarl, 24.
Gjallar-bridge, 135, 249.
Gjallarhorn, 72, 88, 142.
Gjallar-river, 135.
Gjalp, 178, 179, 180, 182.
Gjoll, 56, 96, 248.
Gjuke, 199, 204, 206, 266.
Gjukungs, 193-201.
Glad, 73, 260.
Gladsheim, 28, 69, 259.
Glam, 183.
Glapsvid, 81, 245.
Glaser, 187, 199.
Gleipner, 87, 94.
Glener, 66.
Gler, 73, 260.
Glitner, 77, 89, 90, 259.
Glod, 240.
Gloin, 71.
Glora, 44.
Gna, 98, 99.
Gnipa-cave, 8, 143.
Gnita-heath, 196-200.
God, 33-40, 54.
Godheim, 225, 236.
Goe, 241.
Goin, 75.
Gol, 99.
Golden Age, 69-71.
Goldfax, 169, 176.
Gomul, 106.
Gondler, 81, 245.
Gondul, 252.
Gopul, 106.
Gor, 241.
Got, 246.
Gote, 199.
Gothorm, 198-211.
Gotland, 206.
Goransson, J., 18.
Grabak, 76.
Grad, 106.
Grafvitner, 75.
Grafvollud, 76.
Gram, 199, 200.
Grane, 198.
Grave, 199.
Gray, 16.
Greece and Greeks, 28, 31, 39-43, 222-229, 250.
Greenland, 30.
Greip, 178-183.
Grid, 177.
Gridarvol, 177, 181.
Grim, 81, 245, 246.
Grimhild, 198.
Grimm (Brothers), 244, 253, 258.
Grimner, 81, 244, 245, 247, 248.
Grjottungard, 171, 174.
Groa, 173, 174.
Grotte, 207, 210.
Grottesong, 207, 208.
Guatemala, 88, 244.
Gud, 100.
Gudny, 198.
Gudolf, 45.
Gudrun, 179-203.
Gullinburste, 134.
Gullintanne, 88.
Gulltop, 73, 88, 134, 259.
Gullveig, 252, 265.
Gungner, 142, 189-192.
Gunlad, 160-165.
Gunn, 252.
Gunnar, 198-203.
Gunnthro, 56, 248.
Gunthrain, 106.
Gwodan, 244.
Gylfe, 9, 16, 46, 49, 50, 51, 52, 151, 221, 224, 231, 232, 242.
Gyller, 73, 260.
Gymer, 101, 103, 238.


H

Ha, 218.
Habrok, 108.
Hafthor, 235.
Hakon, 21-24, 236.
Haleygjatal, 47.
Halfdan, 213.
Hallinskide, 88.
Haloge, 240.
Halogeland, 240.
Ham, 35, 36.
Hamder, 202, 206.
Hamskerper, 99.
Hangagod, 81.
Hangatyr, 165.
Haptagod, 81.
Har, 71, 81, 243-246.
Harald Harfager, 51, 243.
Harbard, 245.
Hate, 67.
Haustlong, 184.
Hebrew, 37.
Hedin, 218, 219.
Hedinians, 219.
Heide, 252.
Heidrun, 106.
Heimdal, 6, 8, 88, 89, 134, 142, 143, 153, 232, 259, 260.
Heimer, 204.
Heimskringla, 10, 22, 50, 57, 221, 224, 239, 242, 243, 263.
Hekate, 255.
Hektor, 43, 151, 167, 168.
Hel, 6, 7, 55, 56, 57, 91-96, 133, 135-137, 142, 144, 148, 248, 255,
  264.
Helblinde, 81, 91, 245.
Held, 255.
Helge Hundings-Bane, 248.
Helgeland, 240.
Helmet-bearer, 245.
Henderson, 16.
Hendride, 44.
Hengekjapt, 207.
Hengist, 46, 229.
Hepte, 71.
Herakles, 41.
Heran, 54.
Herbert, 16.
Herfather, 247.
Herfjoter, 99.
Herikon, 43, 221.
Herjan, 54, 81, 245, 247.
Hermanric, 262.
Hermod, 45, 133, 135, 136, 249, 260.
Hero-book, 250.
Herodotos, 22.
Herteit, 81, 245.
Hesse (Rhenish), 255.
Hild, 99, 198, 218, 219, 252.
Hildebrand, Karl, 18.
Hildesvin, 215.
Himminbjorg, 77, 88, 89, 232, 259.
Hindfell, 199.
Hjaddingavig, 219.
Hjalmbore, 81.
Hjalprek, 196.
Hjalte the Valiant, 215.
Hjarrande, 218.
Hjordis, 196.
Hjuke, 66, 250.
Hledjolf, 71.
Hleidre, 212, 214.
Hler, 153, 240, 243.
Hlidskjalf, 64, 77, 101, 137.
Hlin, 98, 145.
Hlodyn, 145.
Hlok, 99.
Hloride, 44.
Hlymdaler, 204.
Hnikar, 54, 81, 245, 247.
Hnikud, 54, 81, 245.
Hnitbjorg, 161, 162.
Hnos, 97, 238.
Hoder, 7, 89, 132, 148, 260, 265.
Hodmimer’s-holt, 149.
Hofvarpner, 99.
Hogne, 198-218.
Holge, 187.
Holzmann, A., 18.
Homer, 222.
Honer, 84, 153, 155, 157, 184-186, 193, 227, 243.
Hor, 71.
Horn, 97.
Hornklofe, 233.
Horsa, 229.
Howitts, the, 16.
Hrasvelg, 79.
Hreidmar, 193-196.
Hrid, 56.
Hrimfaxe, 65.
Hrimgerd, 251.
Hringhorn, 133.
Hrist, 99.
Hrodvitner, 67.
Hrolf, 241.
Hron, 106.
Hroptatyr, 81, 246.
Hrotte, 196.
Hrungner, 7, 169-176, 210.
Hrym, 141-144.
Hvergelmer, 56, 72, 75, 106, 148, 243, 248, 249.
Hvitserk, 215.
Huge, 121, 126.
Hugin, 105.
Hugstare, 71.
Humboldt, 244.
Hymer, 128-133, 167, 186.
Hyndla, 249.
Hyrrokken, 133, 134.


I

Iceland, 240.
Ida, 148.
Idavold, 69.
Ide, 159.
Idun, 6, 7, 10, 28, 87, 88, 153, 155, 157, 184-187, 264.
Iliad, 22, 221, 224.
Ilos, 43.
India, 28, 244.
Irmina, 255.
Ironwood, 57.
Isefjord, 231.
Italy, 42, 222.
Ithaca, 223.
Itrman, 45.
Iva, 182.
Ivalde, 112, 189.


J

Jack, 247, 250.
Jafnhar, 81, 243, 245, 246.
Jalanger, 207.
Jalg, 54.
Jalk, 54, 81, 245-247.
Jamieson, 16.
Japhet, 35.
Jarnsaxa, 173.
Jarnved, 67.
Jarnvidjes, 67.
Jat, 45.
Jerusalem, 225.
Jews, 29.
Johnstown, 232.
Jokul, 240.
Jonaker, 202, 206.
Jonsson (Arngrim), 17.
Jonsson (Th.), 18, 19.
Jord, 65, 100, 174, 175.
Jormungand, 91-96, 144.
Jormunrek, 202-206.
Joruvold, 71.
Jotland, 240.
Jotunheim, 49, 65, 69, 91, 110, 111, 115, 133, 144, 157, 169, 176, 185,
  187, 231, 259.
Juno, 40, 250.
Jupiter, 41, 42.
Jutland, 46, 247.


K

Kadmos, 241.
Kalevala, 84.
Kalmuks, 225.
Kann, 254.
Kare, 240-243.
Kemble, 258.
Kerlangs, 73.
Keyser (Rud.), 18, 19, 20, 23, 25, 26.
Kesfet, 45.
Kile, 71.
Kingsley (Chas.), 230.
Kjalar, 81, 245.
Knue, 211.
Kormt, 73.
Kvaser, 137, 160-165, 227.


L

Laage, 231.
Lading, 93.
Laing (Samuel), 22, 224.
Landvide, 259.
Laomedon, 43.
Latin, 222.
Laufey, 91, 110, 113, 137.
Leidre (See Hleidre), 231.
Leipt, 56, 248.
Lerad, 106, 263.
Letfet, 73, 260.
Liber, 228.
Libera, 228.
Lif, 149.
Lifthraser, 149.
Lit, 71, 134.
Lithraborg, 231.
Ljosalfaheim, 259.
Loder, 243.
Lofn, 98.
Loge, 120, 126, 240, 243.
Logrinn, 49.
Loke, 6-8, 80, 91-96, 109-145, 151, 153, 155-158, 176-187, 188-199, 240,
  260, 261, 264, 265.
Lopt, 91, 186.
Loptsson (Jon), 20.
Lora, 44.
Loricos, 44.
Loride, 44.
Lovar, 71.
Lybia, 230, 242.
Lyngve, 94.


M

Macbeth, 252-265.
Macedonians, 39, 40, 42.
Maelstrom, 208.
Magi, 45.
Magne, 45, 48, 149, 168, 173.
Magnusson (Arne), 17, 18, 23.
Malar, 49, 231, 232.
Mallet, 16, 230.
Manilius, 229.
Mannheim, 225, 236.
Mardol, 97.
Mars, 222.
Mechtild, 255.
Mediterranean Sea, 38.
Megingjarder, 83, 106, 176, 180.
Meile, 174.
Menglad, 260, 262.
Menja, 206-209, 267.
Menon, 44.
Metellus, 223.
Mexican, 244.
Midgard, 5, 62, 63, 67, 109, 128, 145, 259.
Midvitne, 245.
Mimer, 10, 19, 72, 73, 142, 143, 224, 227, 228, 234, 243.
Mist, 99.
Mithridates, 222, 229.
Mjodvitner, 70.
Mjoll, 241.
Mjolner, 6-8, 64, 83, 111-130, 134, 148, 149, 171, 176.
Mjotud, 246.
Möbius (Th.), 18.
Mode, 45, 148, 149, 168.
Modgud, 135, 249.
Modsogner, 70.
Moin, 75.
Mokkerkalfe, 171, 173.
Moldau, 228.
Mongolians, 225.
Moon, 66.
Moongarm, 67.
Morn, 185, 186.
Morris (Wm.), 224, 266.
Müller (Max), 244.
Müller (P. E.), 18, 20.
Mummius, 223.
Munch (P. A.), 18.
Mundilfare, 66.
Munin, 105.
Munon, 44.
Muspel, 68, 103, 112, 142, 144.
Muspelheim, 5, 56, 58, 61, 66, 243, 247, 249, 259.
Muss, 254.
Mysing, 207.


N

Na, 70.
Naglfar, 65, 112, 141, 144.
Nain, 70.
Nal, 91.
Nanna, 81, 134, 136, 153.
Nare, 91, 139.
Narfe, 65, 91, 139.
Nastrand, 9, 147.
Nep, 89, 134.
Neptune, 41.
Niblungs, 101, 193, 199, 201, 202, 262, 263, 266.
Niblung Story, 30, 266, 267.
Nida Mountains, 147.
Nide, 70.
Nidhug, 9, 72, 75, 148, 249.
Niflheim, 5, 56, 58, 72, 92, 243, 247, 249, 259.
Niflhel, 55, 111, 259.
Niflungs, 193-199, 201, 202, 266.
Night,65.
Nikar, 54.
Nikuz, 54.
Nile, 41.
Niping, 70.
Njord, 6, 42, 84, 85, 101, 153, 158, 159, 187, 227, 228, 232, 236, 237,
  239, 259, 260.
Njorvasnud, 225.
Njorve, 225.
Noah, 33, 35, 225.
Noatun, 84, 85, 158, 232, 237, 259.
Non, 106.
Nor, 241.
Nordre, 61, 70.
Norfe, 65.
Norns, 73-78.
Norway, 215, 218, 222, 230, 236, 239, 240, 241, 251, 256, 257.
Not, 106.
Ny, 71.
Nye, 70.
Nyrad, 71.
Nyerup (R.), 18.


O

Oder, 97, 112, 228, 238.
Odin, 5-10, 29, 39, 43, 45-47, 60, 65, 73, 77, 80, 83, 86, 89, 96, 100,
  104-112, 132-134, 137, 142, 143, 145, 153, 155, 157, 158, 160-165,
  168-176, 181, 185, 186, 187, 189-192, 194, 195, 206, 221, 239, 240,
  243-263.
Odinse, 230, 231, 250.
Odinstown, 232.
Odoacer, 223.
Odrarer, 160-165.
Odyssey, 22, 224.
Ofner, 76, 245, 247.
Oin, 70.
Oku-Thor, 82, 151, 167, 168, 209.
Olafsson (Magnus), 17.
Olafsson (Stephan), 17.
Olaf (Thordsson), 9, 20, 22, 23-27.
Olaf (Tryggvason), 261.
Olvalde, 159.
Ome, 54, 81, 245.
Onar, 70.
Orboda, 101.
Ore, 70, 71.
Orestes, 223.
Orkneys, 218.
Ormt, 73.
Orner, 210.
Orvandel, 173-175.
Oske, 54, 81, 245, 247.
Otter, 193.
Ottilia, 255.


P

Paulus (Diakonos), 244.
Persia, 225.
Petersen (N. M.), 248.
Pfeiffer (Fr.), 18.
Pigott, 16.
Pluto, 49.
Poetry (origin of), 161-165.
Polar Sea, 248.
Pompey, 43, 222, 229, 230.
Pontus, 229.
Priamos, 39, 43, 44, 166, 167.
Pyrrhus, 168.


Q

Quaser (see Kvaser).
Quenland, 240.


R

Rachel, 255.
Radgrid, 99.
Redsvid, 71.
Rafn, 215.
Rafnagud, 105.
Ragnar, 206.
Ragnar (Lodbrok), 205.
Ragnarok, 8, 88, 96, 104, 139-145, 167, 219, 228, 247, 249, 264, 266.
Ran, 188.
Randgrid, 99.
Randver, 202-205.
Rask (Rasmus), 18.
Ratatosk, 75.
Rate, 163.
Refil, 196.
Regin, 193-200.
Reginleif, 99.
Reidartyr, 165.
Reidgotaland, 46.
Rek, 71.
Remus, 222, 223.
Resen (P. J.), 17.
Rhine, 201, 230.
Rind, 89, 100.
Ritta, 46.
Roddros, 167.
Rolf Krake, 214-217.
Rogner, 246.
Rome, 31, 43, 221-230.
Romulus, 222, 223.
Romulus (Augustulus), 223.
Roskva, 114, 115.
Rosta, 100.
Rugman (Jon), 17.
Russia, 225, 230.


S

Sad, 81, 245.
Saga, 97, 259.
Sager, 66.
Sahrimner, 104.
Saming, 47, 230, 236.
Samund the Wise, 20, 26.
Sangetal, 81, 245, 247.
Saracens, 225.
Sarmatia, 225.
Saturn, 38, 40, 41, 42.
Saxland, 45, 48, 230, 231.
Saxo-Grammaticus, 239.
Saxons, 215, 229.
Schlegel, 253.
Scotland, 257, 258.
Scott (Walter), 257, 258.
Scythia (Magna), 225, 229, 244.
Seeland, 49, 50, 231, 242.
Sekin, 106.
Sennar, 36.
Serkland, 225.
Sessrymner, 86.
Shakspeare, 252-256.
Shem, 36.
Siar, 71.
Sibyl, 44.
Sid, 106.
Sidhot, 81, 245, 247.
Sidskeg, 81, 245, 247.
Sif, 44, 89, 170, 187, 189-192.
Sigar, 46.
Sigfather, 81, 245, 247.
Sigfrid, 19, 232, 263.
Sigge, 46.
Sighan, 257.
Sighvat, 20.
Sigmund, 196-204.
Sigtuna, 47, 230, 232.
Sigtyr, 165, 189, 247.
Sigurd, 196-204, 262, 267.
Sigyn, 139, 153, 185.
Silvertop, 73, 260.
Simrock (K.), 18, 19, 253, 263.
Simul, 66.
Sindre, 147, 190-192.
Siner, 73, 260.
Sinfjotle, 204.
Sjafne, 98.
Sjofn, 98.
Skade, 84, 85, 139, 158, 159, 185, 187, 228, 236, 259.
Skeggold, 99.
Skeidbrimer, 73, 200.
Skidbladner, 108-113, 189-192, 234, 263.
Skifid, 71.
Skilfing, 81, 246, 247.
Skinfaxe, 66.
Skirfir, 71.
Skirner, 94, 101-103, 143, 263.
Skjaldun, 45.
Skjold, 45, 46, 206, 230, 231.
Skogul, 99, 252.
Skol, 67.
Skrymer, 116-127.
Skuld, 74, 100, 243, 252, 256.
Skule (Jarl), 21-24, 249.
Sleeping Beauty, 254.
Sleipner, 73, 108-112, 133, 169-176, 259.
Slid, 56, 248.
Slidrugtanne, 134.
Sna, 241.
Snorre, 9, 19-27, 221, 226, 233, 239, 242, 243.
Snotra, 98.
Sokmimer, 245.
Sokvabek, 97, 259.
Sol, 99.
Solvarg, 67.
Son, 164, 165.
Sorle, 202-206
Spain, 225.
Steinthor, 235.
Stephens (Geo.), 230.
Strabo, 226.
Sturle (Thordsson), 21, 249.
Styx, 248.
Sudre, 61, 70.
Sun, 66.
Surt, 8, 57, 78, 142-149, 168, 249.
Suttung, 164, 165.
Svade, 241.
Svadilfare, 110, 111.
Svafner, 76, 243, 246, 247.
Svanhild, 199-206.
Svarin, 71, 259.
Svartalfaheim, 94.
Svarthofde, 58, 250.
Svasud, 80.
Sveinsson (Br.), 17.
Sviagris, 215, 217.
Svid, 246.
Svidar, 54.
Svidr, 236.
Svidrer, 54, 245.
Svidrir, 81.
Svidur, 245.
Svipdag, 46, 215, 262.
Svipol, 81, 245.
Svithjod, 46, 49, 181, 207, 211, 225, 228, 236.
Svebdegg, 46.
Svol, 56, 106, 248.
Svolne, 174.
Sylg, 56, 248.
Syn, 98.
Syr, 97.


T

Tacitus, 244.
Tanais, 225.
Tanaquisl, 225, 226.
Tangnjost, 83.
Tangrisner, 83.
Tartareans, 225.
Taylor (W.), 16.
Testament (New), 28.
Testament (Old), 28.
Teutons, 222-224, 229, 230, 239, 244, 253, 263, 264.
Thek, 71, 81, 245.
Thjalfe, 114, 115, 120, 121, 126, 171, 173, 181.
Thjasse, 84, 85, 155-158, 184-187, 210.
Thjode, 196.
Thjodnuma, 106.
Thjodolf, 51, 174, 184, 243.
Thok, 136, 137, 264.
Thol, 106.
Thor, 6, 8, 29, 41, 44, 65, 73, 82, 83, 89, 100, 109-153, 165-192,
  205-243, 251, 259, 260, 263.
Thorarin, 235.
Thord, 20.
Thorer, 235.
Thorin, 70.
Thorleif, 176, 184, 187.
Thorn, 179.
Thorodd (Runemaster), 27.
Thorpe (Benjamin), 15, 252, 257, 259, 262.
Thorre, 241.
Thorstein (Viking’s son), 241.
Thrace, 44, 221.
Thride, 81, 243-246.
Thro, 71, 81.
Throin, 71.
Thror, 245.
Thrud, 99.
Thruda, 183.
Thrudgelmer, 250.
Thrudheim, 44, 259.
Thrudvang, 82, 127, 173, 232, 259.
Thrym, 7.
Thrymheim, 84, 85, 156, 259.
Thucydides, 22.
Thud, 81, 245.
Thul, 56.
Thule, 30.
Thund, 81, 246.
Thvite, 96.
Thyn, 106.
Tiber, 221.
Tieck, 250.
Tivisco, 244.
Tom Thumb, 251.
Torfason (T.), 17.
Tror, 44.
Tros, 43.
Troy, 38, 43, 44, 47, 64, 151, 166, 167, 168, 222-224, 229.
Tshudic, 240.
Turkey, 38, 45, 47, 151, 166.
Turkistan, 228, 229.
Turkland, 229.
Tyr, 6, 8, 29, 87, 92, 95, 143, 153, 165, 187, 244, 260.


U

Ud, 81, 245.
Uhland (Ludw.), 18, 263.
Ukko, 82, 84, 239.
Ukko-Thor, 239.
Ulfhedinn, 233.
Uller, 89, 153, 174, 183, 259, 260.
Ulysses, 151, 223.
Umea, 250.
Upsala, 47, 215, 216, 232, 237.
Ural Mountains, 229.
Urd, 10, 19, 73, 74, 76, 243, 252-256.
Utgard, 118-127.
Utgard-Loke, 119-130.


V

Vafthrudner, 58, 243, 244.
Vafud, 81, 246.
Vafurloge, 199, 200.
Vag, 214, 215.
Vainamoinen, 84.
Vak, 81, 246.
Valaskjalf, 77, 80, 259.
Valdemar (King), 23, 27.
Vale, 71, 89, 100, 139, 148, 153, 260.
Valfather, 73, 243.
Valhal, 6, 7, 28, 51, 81, 99, 104-109, 132, 170-176, 188, 235, 243.
Vanadis, 97.
Vanaheim, 226, 227, 259.
Vanaland, 226-228.
Vanaquisl, 225-226.
Var, 98.
Vartare, 192.
Vasad, 80.
Ve, 60, 227, 230, 243, 249.
Vedas, 253.
Vedfolner, 75.
Veggdegg, 45.
Vegsvin, 106.
Vegtam, 247, 264.
Venus, 42, 256.
Veratyr, 81, 247.
Verdande, 74, 243, 252, 256.
Verer, 46.
Vesete, 240.
Vestfal, 46.
Vestre, 61.
Vid, 56, 106.
Vidar, 8, 89, 143, 145, 148, 153, 168, 177, 187, 259, 260.
Vidblain, 78.
Vidfin, 66.
Vidolf, 58, 250.
Vidrer, 54, 247.
Vidsete, 215.
Vidur, 81.
Vifil, 240.
Vifilsey, 240.
Vig, 70.
Vigfusson (G.), 9, 26, 75, 223, 248, 265.
Vigrid, 142, 146.
Viking, 240.
Vile, 60, 230, 243, 249, 277.
Villenwood, 251.
Vilmeide, 58, 250.
Vimer, 177, 178.
Vin, 106.
Vina, 106.
Vindalf, 70.
Vindlone, 80.
Vindsval, 80.
Vingener, 45, 149.
Vingethor, 44.
Vingolf, 54, 69, 81, 247.
Vinland, 30.
Virfir, 71.
Virgil, 222, 223, 242.
Vit, 71.
Vitrgils, 46.
Vodin, 45.
Vog, 214, 215.
Volsungs, 46, 196-205.
Volsung saga, 224, 266.
Volukrontes, 167.
Von, 96.
Vor, 98.
Vot, 215.
Votan, 244.


W

Wafurloge, 263.
Wainamoinen, 239.
Wallachia, 228.
Warburton, 253.
Weird Sisters, 253-256.
Welsh, 240.
Wenern, 215.
Wessebrun Prayer, 256.
Wilbet, 255.
Wilkin (E.), 18, 19, 20.
Williamstown, 232.
Witches, 253-256.
Wodan, 244.
Worbet, 255.
Worm (Chr.), 17.
Worm (Ole), 17.


Y

Ydaler, 259.
Yg, 81, 246.
Ygdrasil, 6, 8, 15, 29, 72, 73-78, 108, 142, 143, 252, 263.
Ylg, 56, 248.
Ymer, 5, 24, 58-63, 70, 128, 179, 240, 249, 250.
Ynglinga saga, 50, 243.
Ynglings, 47, 238.
Yngve, 47, 230, 238.
Yngve-Frey, 186.
Yrsa, 213-216.
Yvigg, 46.


Z

Zalmoxis, 244.
Zeus, 244, 246.
Zoroaster, 37, 40.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Errors and anomalies noted by transcriber:

A few paragraph-ending periods (full stops) have been supplied.

The author omitted vowel modifiers and diacritics from all names in
the body text: Hakon, Malar, Mjolnir. The footnotes are generally more
linguistically precise.

The name “Svanhild/Swanhild” is spelled “Swanhild” in the body text,
“Svanhild” in the Vocabulary (all occurrences) and Index. The spelling
“skees” is used consistently.


Ambiguous stanzas in verse:
    The king saw
    ...
    ’Round his house.
    ...
    Struck to the ground.
    ...
    With blows and wounds.
  _page break after “his house”; no stanza break in printed text until
  after “blows and wounds”_


Typographical errors (all from “Notes”, Vocabulary and Index):

a great sea goes into / Njorvasound
Footnote 102: Njorvasound ...
  _spelling as in original: should probably be “Njorvasund”_

Chapter VI of Ynglinga / Saga
  _text reads “Ynglingla”_

the much-traveled man, the / ἀνὴρ πολύτροπος
  _text reads “πολύθροπος”_

the valkyrie says / at berserkja reiðu vil ek þik spyrja
  _text reads “pik spyrja”_

identical in root with Lat. _divus_; / Sansk. _dwas_
  _so in original; the Sanskrit is usually given as “dyaus”_

Zalmoxis, derived from the Gr. Ζαλμός, helmet
  _so in original. Ζαλμός is defined by Liddell and Scott--
  a dictionary available to the author-- as Thracian for “a skin.”_

Compare the Greek word νεφέλη = mist.
  _text reads “νεφέλγ”_

and then cooly says to him
  _spelling as in original_

Through this he / slipt.
  _variant spelling in original_

He impersonated all that was good and holy
  _text reads “al”_

This chapter of _Skaldskaparmal_
  _text reads “Skaldkaparmal”_

Echoes from Mistland; Echoes from Mist-Land
  _inconsistent forms in original_

JARNVIDJES. The giantesses dwelling in Ironwood.
  _text reads “JARNVIDJIS”_

JORMUNGAND. The Midgard-serpent.
  _text reads “JORMUNDGAND”_

... from the mouth {of the} chained Fenris-wolf.
... out of whose body the world was cr{eated.}
  _page image incomplete; words and letters in braces supplied from
  context_

Randver, 202-205.
  _text reads “22-205”_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Younger Edda, by Snorre

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNGER EDDA ***

***** This file should be named 18947-0.txt or 18947-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/9/4/18947/

Produced by Louise Hope, R. Cedron and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
