The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brigade Commander, by J. W. Deforest

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Brigade Commander

Author: J. W. Deforest

Release Date: October 24, 2007 [EBook #23182]
Last Updated: November 4, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BRIGADE COMMANDER ***




Produced by David Widger






THE BRIGADE COMMANDER

By J. W. Deforest

By permission of “The New York Times.”


The Colonel was the idol of his bragging old regiment and of the
bragging brigade which for the last six months he had commanded.

He was the idol, not because he was good and gracious, not because he
spared his soldiers or treated them as fellow-citizens, but because he
had led them to victory and made them famous. If a man will win battles
and give his brigade a right to brag loudly of its doings, he may have
its admiration and even its enthusiastic devotion, though he be as
pitiless and as wicked as Lucifer.

“It’s nothin’ to me what the Currnell is in prrivit, so long as he shows
us how to whack the rrebs,” said Major Gahogan, commandant of the “Old
Tenth.” “Moses saw God in the burrnin’ bussh, an’ bowed down to it, an’
worr-shipt it. It wasn’t the bussh he worrshipt; it was his God that
was in it. An’ I worrship this villin of a Currnell (if he is a villin)
because he’s almighty and gives us the vict’ry. He’s nothin’ but a human
burrnin’ bussh, perhaps, but he’s got the god of war in um. Adjetant
Wallis, it’s a------long time between dhrinks, as I think ye was
sayin’, an’ with rayson. See if ye can’t confiscate a canteen of whiskee
somewhere in the camp. Bedad, if I can’t buy it I’ll stale it. We’re
goin’ to fight tomorry, an’ it may be it’s the last chance we’ll have
for a dhrink, unless there’s more lik’r now in the other worrld than
Dives got.”

The brigade was bivouacked in some invisible region, amid the damp,
misty darkness of a September night. The men lay in their ranks, each
with his feet to the front and his head rearward, each covered by his
overcoat and pillowed upon his haversack, each with his loaded rifle
nestled close beside him. Asleep as they were, or dropping placidly into
slumber, they were ready to start in order to their feet and pour out
the red light and harsh roar of combat. There were two lines of battle,
each of three regiments of infantry, the first some two hundred yards
in advance of the second. In the space between them lay two four-gun
batteries, one of them brass twelve-pounder “Napoleons,” and the other
rifled Parrotts. To the rear of the infantry were the recumbent troopers
and picketed horses of a regiment of cavalry. All around, in the far,
black distance, invisible and inaudible, paced or watched stealthily the
sentinels of the grand guards.

There was not a fire, not a torch, nor a star-beam in the whole bivouac
to guide the feet of Adjutant Wallis in his pilgrimage after
whiskey. The orders from brigade headquarters had been strict against
illuminations, for the Confederates were near at hand in force, and a
surprise was proposed as well as feared. A tired and sleepy youngster,
almost dropping with the heavy somnolence of wearied adolescence, he
stumbled on through the trials of an undiscernible and unfamiliar
footing, lifting his heavy riding-boots sluggishly over imaginary
obstacles, and fearing the while lest his toil were labor misspent. It
was a dry camp, he felt dolefully certain, or there would have been more
noise in it. He fell over a sleeping sergeant, and said to him hastily,
“Steady, man--a friend!” as the half-roused soldier clutched his rifle.
Then he found a lieutenant, and shook him in vain; further on a captain,
and exchanged saddening murmurs with him; further still a camp-follower
of African extraction, and blasphemed him.

“It’s a God-forsaken camp, and there isn’t a horn in it,” said Adjutant
Wallis to himself as he pursued his groping journey. “Bet you I don’t
find the first drop,” he continued, for he was a betting boy, and
frequently argued by wagers, even with himself. “Bet you two to one I
don’t. Bet you three to one--ten to one.”

Then he saw, an indefinite distance beyond him, burning like red-hot
iron through the darkness, a little scarlet or crimson gleam, as of a
lighted cigar.

“That’s Old Grumps, of the Bloody Fourteenth,” he thought. “I’ve raided
into his happy sleeping-grounds. I’ll draw on him.”

But Old Grumps, otherwise Colonel Lafayette Gildersleeve, had no
rations--that is, no whiskey.

“How do you suppose an officer is to have a drink, Lieutenant?” he
grumbled. “Don’t you know that our would-be Brigadier sent all the
commissary to the rear day before yesterday? A eanteenful can’t last two
days. Mine went empty about five minutes ago.”

“Oh, thunder!” groaned Wallis, saddened by that saddest of all thoughts,
“Too late!” “Well, least said soonest mended. I must wobble back to my
Major.”

“He’ll send you off to some other camp as dry as this one. Wait ten
minutes, and he’ll be asleep. Lie down on my blanket and light your
pipe. I want to talk to you about official business--about our would-be
Brigadier.”

“Oh, _your_ turn will come some day,” mumbled Wallis, remembering
Gildersleeve’s jealousy of the brigade commander--a jealousy which only
gave tongue when aroused by “commissary.” “If you do as well as usual
to-morrow you can have your own brigade.”

“I suppose you think we are all going to do well to-morrow,” scoffed Old
Grumps, whose utterance by this time stumbled. “I suppose you expect to
whip and to have a good time. I suppose you brag on fighting and enjoy
it.”

“I like it well enough when it goes right; and it generally does go
right with this brigade. I should like it better if the rebs would fire
higher and break quicker.”

“That depends on the way those are commanded whose business it is to
break them,” growled Old Grumps. “I don’t say but what we are rightly
commanded,” he added, remembering his duty to superiors. “I concede and
acknowledge that our would-be Brigadier knows his military business. But
the blessing of God, Wallis! I believe in Waldron as a soldier. But as a
man and a Christian, faugh!”

Gildersleeve had clearly emptied his canteen unassisted; he never talked
about Christianity when perfectly sober.

“What was your last remark?” inquired Wallis, taking his pipe from his
mouth to grin. Even a superior officer might be chaffed a little in the
darkness.

“I made no last remark,” asserted the Colonel with dignity. “I’m not
a-dying yet. If I said anything last it was a mere exclamation of
disgust--the disgust of an officer and gentleman. I suppose you know
something about our would-be Brigadier. I suppose you think you know
something about him.”

“Bet you I know _all_ about him,” affirmed Wallis. “He enlisted in the
Old Tenth as a common soldier. Before he had been a week in camp they
found that he knew his biz, and they made him a sergeant. Before we
started for the field the Governor got his eye on him and shoved him
into a lieutenancy. The first battle h’isted him to a captain. And
the second--bang! whiz! he shot up to colonel right over the heads of
everybody, line and field. Nobody in the Old Tenth grumbled. They saw
that he knew his biz. I know _all_ about him. What’ll you bet?”

“I’m not a betting man, Lieutenant, except in a friendly game of poker,”
 sighed Old Grumps. “You don’t know anything about your Brigadier,” he
added in a sepulchral murmur, the echo of an empty canteen. “I have only
been in this brigade a month, and I know more than you do, far, very far
more, sorry to say it. He’s a reformed clergyman. He’s an apostatized
minister.” The Colonel’s voice as he said this was solemn and sad enough
to do credit to an undertaker. “It’s a bad sort, Wallis,” he continued,
after another deep sigh, a very highly perfumed one, the sigh of a
barkeeper. “When a clergyman falls, he falls for life and eternity,
like a woman or an angel. I never knew a backslidden shepherd to come
to good. Sooner or later he always goes to the devil, and takes down
whomsoever hangs to him.”

“He’ll take down the Old Tenth, then,” asserted Wallis. “It hangs to
him. Bet you two to one he takes it along.”

“You’re right, Adjutant; spoken like a soldier,” swore Gildersleeve,
“And the Bloody Fourteenth, too. It will march into the burning pit as
far as any regiment; and the whole brigade, yes, sir! But a backslidden
shepherd, my God! Have we come to that? I often say to myself, in the
solemn hours of the night, as I remember my Sabbath-school days, ‘Great
Scott! have we come to that?’ A reformed clergyman! An apostatized
minister! Think of it, Wallis, think of it! Why, sir, his very wife ran
away from him. They had but just buried their first boy,” pursued Old
Grumps, his hoarse voice sinking to a whimper. “They drove home from the
burial-place, where lay the new-made grave. Arrived at their door, _he_
got out and extended his hand to help _her_ out. Instead of accepting,
instead of throwing herself into his arms and weeping there, she turned
to the coachman and said, ‘Driver, drive me to my father’s house.’ That
was the end of their wedded life, Wallis.”

The Colonel actually wept at this point, and the maudlin tears were not
altogether insincere. His own wife and children he heartily loved, and
remembered them now with honest tenderness. At home he was not a drinker
and a rough; only amid the hardships and perils of the field.

“That was the end of it, Wallis,” he repeated. “And what was it while it
lasted? What does a woman leave her husband for? Why does she separate
from him over the grave of her innocent first-born? There are twenty
reasons, but they must all of them be good ones. I am sorry to give it
as my decided opinion, Wallis, in perfect confidence, that they must all
be whopping good ones. Well, that was the beginning; only the beginning.
After that he held on for a while, breaking the bread of life to a
skedaddling flock, and then he bolted. The next known of him, three
years later, he enlisted in your regiment, a smart but seedy recruit,
smelling strongly of whiskey.”

“I wish I smelt half as strong of it myself,” grumbled Wallis. “It might
keep out the swamp fever.”

“That’s the true story of Col. John James Waldron,” continued Old
Grumps, with a groan which was very somnolent, as if it were a twin to a
snore. “That’s the true story.”

“I don’t believe the first word of it--that is to say, Colonel, I think
you have been misinformed--and I’ll bet you two to one on it. If he was
nothing more than a minister, how did he know drill and tactics?”

“Oh, I forgot to say he went through West Point--that is, nearly
through. They graduated him in his third year by the back door, Wallis.”

“Oh, that was it, was it? He was a West Pointer, was he? Well, then, the
backsliding was natural, and oughtn’t to count against him. A member of
Benny Haven’s church has a right to backslide anywhere, especially as
the Colonel doesn’t seem to be any worse than some of the rest of us,
who haven’t fallen from grace the least particle, but took our stand at
the start just where we are now. A fellow that begins with a handful of
trumps has a right to play a risky game.”

“I know what euchered him, Wallis. It was the old Little Joker; and
there’s another of the same on hand now.”

“On hand where? What are you driving at, Colonel?”

“He looks like a boy. I mean she looks like a boy. You know what I
mean, Wallis; I mean the boy that makes believe to wait on him. And
her brother is in camp, got here to-night. There’ll be an explanation
to-morrow, and there’ll be bloodshed.”

“Good-night, Colonel, and sleep it off,” said Wallis, rising from
the side of a man whom he believed to be sillily drunk and altogether
untrustworthy. “You know we get after the rebs at dawn.”

“I know it--goo-night, Adjutant--gawbless-you,” mumbled Old Grumps.
“We’ll lick those rebs, won’t we?” he chuckled. “Goo-night, ole fellow,
an’ gawblessyou.”

Whereupon Old Grumps fell asleep, very absurdly overcome by liquor, we
extremely regret to concede, but nobly sure to do his soldierly duty as
soon as he should awake.

Stumbling wearily blanketward, Wallis found his Major and regimental
commander, the genial and gallant Gahogan, slumbering in a peace like
that of the just. He stretched himself anear, put out his hand to touch
his sabre and revolver, drew his caped great-coat over him, moved once
to free his back of a root or pebble, glanced languidly at a single
struggling star, thought for an instant of his far-away mother, turned
his head with a sigh and slept. In the morning he was to fight, and
perhaps to die; but the boyish veteran was too seasoned, and also too
tired, to mind that; he could mind but one thing--nature’s pleading for
rest.

In the iron-gray dawn, while the troops were falling dimly and
spectrally into line, and he was mounting his horse to be ready for
orders, he remembered Gildersleeve’s drunken tale concerning the
commandant, and laughed aloud. But turning his face toward brigade
headquarters (a sylvan region marked out by the branches of a great
oak), he was surprised to see a strange officer, a fair young man in
captain’s uniform, riding slowly toward it.

“Is that the boy’s brother?” he said to himself; and in the next instant
he had forgotten the whole subject; it was time to form and present the
regiment.

Quietly and without tap of drum the small, battle-worn battalions filed
out of their bivouacs into the highway, ordered arms and waited for
the word to march. With a dull rumble the field-pieces trundled slowly
after, and halted in rear of the infantry. The cavalry trotted off
circuitously through the fields, emerged upon a road in advance and
likewise halted, all but a single company, which pushed on for half a
mile, spreading out as it went into a thin line of skirmishers.

Meanwhile a strange interview took place near the great oak which had
sheltered brigade headquarters. As the unknown officer, whom Wallis had
noted, approached it, Col. Waldron was standing by his horse ready
to mount. The commandant was a man of medium size, fairly handsome in
person and features, and apparently about twenty-eight years of age.
Perhaps it was the singular breadth of his forehead which made the lower
part of his face look so unusually slight and feminine. His eyes were
dark hazel, as clear, brilliant, and tender as a girl’s, and brimming
full of a pensiveness which seemed both loving and melancholy. Few
persons, at all events few women, who looked upon him ever looked beyond
his eyes. They were very fascinating, and in a man’s countenance very
strange. They were the kind of eyes which reveal passionate romances,
and which make them.

By his side stood a boy, a singularly interesting and beautiful boy,
fair-haired and blue-eyed, and delicate in color. When this boy saw
the stranger approach he turned as pale as marble, slid away from
the brigade commander’s side, and disappeared behind a group of staff
officers and orderlies. The new-comer also became deathly white as he
glanced after the retreating youth. Then he dismounted, touched his
cap slightly and, as if mechanically, advanced a few steps, and said
hoarsely, “I believe this is Colonel Waldron. I am Captain Fitz Hugh, of
the --th Delaware.”

Waldron put his hand to his revolver, withdrew it instantaneously, and
stood motionless.

“I am on leave of absence from my regiment, Colonel,” continued Fitz
Hugh, speaking now with an elaborate ceremoniousness of utterance
significant of a struggle to suppress violent emotion. “I suppose you
can understand why I made use of it in seeking you.”

Waldron hesitated; he stood gazing at the earth with the air of one who
represses deep pain; at last, after a profound sigh, he raised his eyes
and answered:

“Captain, we are on the eve of a battle. I must attend to my public
duties first. After the battle we will settle our private affair.”

“There is but one way to settle it, Colonel.”

“You shall have your way if you will. You shall do what you will. I only
ask what good will it do to _her?_”

“It will do good to _me_, Colonel,” whispered Fitz Hugh, suddenly
turning crimson. “You forget _me_.”

Waldron’s face also flushed, and an angry sparkle shot from under
his lashes in reply to this utterance of hate, but it died out in an
instant.

“I have done a wrong, and I will accept the consequences,” he said.
“I pledge you my word that I will be at your disposal if I survive the
battle. Where do you propose to remain meanwhile?”

“I will take the same chance, sir. I propose to do my share in the
fighting if you will use me.”

“I am short of staff officers. Will you act as my aid?”

“I will, Colonel,” bowed Fitz Hugh, with a glance which expressed
surprise, and perhaps admiration, at this confidence.

Waldron turned, beckoned his staff officers to approach, and said,
“Gentlemen, this is Captain Fitz Hugh of the --th Delaware. He has
volunteered to join us for the day, and will act as my aid. And now,
Captain, will you ride to the head of the column and order it forward?
There will be no drum-beat and no noise. When you have given your order
and seen it executed, you will wait for me.”

Fitz Hugh saluted, sprang into his saddle and galloped away. A few
minutes later the whole column was plodding on silently toward
its bloody goal. To a civilian, unaccustomed to scenes of war, the
tranquillity of these men would have seemed very wonderful. Many of the
soldiers were still munching the hard bread and raw pork of their meagre
breakfasts, or drinking the cold coffee with which they had filled their
canteens the day previous. Many more were chatting in an undertone,
grumbling over their sore feet and other discomfits, chaffing each
other, and laughing. The general bearing, however, was grave, patient,
quietly enduring, and one might almost say stolid. You would have said,
to judge by their expressions, that these sunburned fellows were merely
doing hard work, and thoroughly commonplace work, without a prospect of
adventure, and much less of danger. The explanation of this calmness, so
brutal perhaps to the eye of a sensitive soul, lies mainly in the fact
that they were all veterans, the survivors of marches, privations,
maladies, sieges, and battles. Not a regiment present numbered four
hundred men, and the average was not above three hundred. The
whole force, including artillery and cavalry, might have been about
twenty-five hundred sabres and bayonets.

At the beginning of the march Waldron fell into the rear of his staff
and mounted orderlies. Then the boy who had fled from Fitz Hugh dropped
out of the tramping escort, and rode up to his side.

“Well, Charlie,” said Waldron, casting a pitying glance at the yet
pallid face and anxious eyes of the youth, “you have had a sad fright. I
make you very miserable.”

“He has found us at last,” murmured Charlie in a tremulous soprano
voice. “What did he say?”

“We are to talk to-morrow. He acts as my aide-de-camp to-day. I ought to
tell you frankly that he is not friendly.”

“Of course, I knew it,” sighed Charlie, while the tears fell.

“It is only one more trouble--one more danger, and perhaps it may pass.
So many _have_ passed.”

“Did you tell him anything to quiet him? Did you tell him that we were
married?”

“But we are not married yet, Charlie. We shall be, I hope.”

“But you ought to have told him that we were. It might stop him from
doing something--mad. Why didn’t you tell him so? Why didn’t you think
of it?”

“My dear little child, we are about to have a battle. I should like to
carry some honor and truth into it.”

“Where is he?” continued Charlie, unconvinced and unappeased. “I want to
see him. Is he at the head of the column? I want to speak to him, just
one word. He won’t hurt me.”

She suddenly spurred her horse, wheeled into the fields, and dashed
onward. Fitz Hugh was lounging in his saddle, and sombrely surveying the
passing column, when she galloped up to him.

“Carrol!” she said, in a choked voice, reining in by his side, and
leaning forward to touch his sleeve.

He threw one glance at her--a glance of aversion, if not of downright
hatred, and turned his back in silence.

“He is my husband, Carrol,” she went on rapidly. “I knew you didn’t
understand it. I ought to have written you about it. I thought I would
come and tell you before you did anything absurd. We were married as
soon as he heard that his wife was dead.”

“What is the use of this?” he muttered hoarsely. “She is not dead. I
heard from her a week ago. She was living a week ago.”

“Oh, Carrol!” stammered Charlie. “It was some mistake then. Is it
possible! And he was so sure! But he can get a divorce, you know. She
abandoned him. Or _she_ can get one. No, _he_ can get it--of course,
when she abandoned him. But, Carrol, she _must_ be dead--he was _so_
sure.”

“She is _not_ dead, I tell you. And there can be no divorce. Insanity
bars all claim to a divorce. She is in an asylum. She had to leave him,
and then she went mad.”

“Oh, no, Carrol, it is all a mistake; it is not so. Carrol,” she
murmured in a voice so faint that he could not help glancing at her,
half in fury and half in pity. She was slowly falling from her horse.
He sprang from his saddle, caught her in his arms, and laid her on the
turf, wishing the while that it covered her grave. Just then one of
Waldron’s orderlies rode up and exclaimed: “What is the matter with
the--the boy? Hullo, Charlie.”

Fitz Hugh stared at the man in silence, tempted to tear him from his
horse. “The boy is ill,” he answered when he recovered his self-command.
“Take charge of him yourself.” He remounted, rode onward out of sight
beyond a thicket, and there waited for the brigade commander, now and
then fingering his revolver. As Charlie was being placed in an ambulance
by the orderly and a sergeant’s wife, Waldron came up, reined in his
horse violently, and asked in a furious voice, “Is that boy hurt?

“Ah--fainted,” he added immediately. “Thank you, Mrs. Gunner. Take good
care of him--the best of care, my dear woman, and don’t let him leave
you all day.”

Further on, when Fitz Hugh silently fell into his escort, he merely
glanced at him in a furtive way, and then cantered on rapidly to the
head of the cavalry. There he beckoned to the tall, grave, iron-gray
Chaplain of the Tenth, and rode with him for nearly an hour, apart,
engaged in low and seemingly impassioned discourse. From this interview
Mr. Colquhoun returned to the escort with a strangely solemnized, tender
countenance, while the commandant, with a more cheerful air than he had
yet worn that day, gave himself to his martial duties, inspecting the
landscape incessantly with his glass, and sending frequently for news
to the advance scouts. It may properly be stated here that the Chaplain
never divulged to any one the nature of the conversation which he had
held with his Colonel.

Nothing further of note occurred until the little army, after two hours
of plodding march, wound through a sinuous, wooded ravine, entered a
broad, bare, slightly undulating valley, and for the second time halted.
Waldron galloped to the summit of a knoll, pointed to a long eminence
which faced him some two miles distant, and said tranquilly, “There is
our battle-ground.”

“Is that the enemy’s position?” returned Captain Ives, his
adjutant-general. “We shall have a tough job if we go at it from here.”

Waldron remained in deep thought for some minutes, meanwhile scanning
the ridge and all its surroundings.

“What I want to know,” he observed, at last, “is whether they have
occupied the wooded knolls in front of their right and around their
right flank.”

Shortly afterward the commander of the scout ing squadron came riding
back at a furious pace.

“They are on the hill, Colonel,” he shouted.

“Yes, of course,” nodded Waldron; “but have they occupied the woods
which veil their right front and flank?”

“Not a bit of it; my fellows have cantered all through, and up to the
base of the hill.”

“Ah!” exclaimed the brigade commander, with a rush of elation. “Then it
will be easy work. Go back, Captain, and scatter your men through
the wood, and hold it, if possible. Adjutant, call up the regimental
commanders at once. I want them to understand my plan fully.”

In a few minutes, Gahogan, of the Tenth; Gildersleeve, of the
Fourteenth; Peck, of the First; Thomas, of the Seventh; Taylor, of the
Eighth, and Colburn, of the Fifth, were gathered around their commander.
There, too, was Bradley, the boyish, red-cheeked chief of the artillery;
and Stilton, the rough, old, bearded regular, who headed the cavalry.
The staff was at hand, also, including Fitz Hugh, who sat his horse a
little apart, downcast and sombre and silent, but nevertheless keenly
interested. It is worthy of remark, by the way, that Waldron took
no special note of him, and did not seem conscious of any disturbing
presence. Evil as the man may have been, he was a thoroughly good
soldier, and just now he thought but of his duties.

“Gentlemen,” he said, “I want you to see your field of battle. The enemy
occupy that long ridge. How shall we reach it?”

“I think, if we got at it straight from here, we shan’t miss it,”
 promptly judged Old Grumps, his red-oak countenance admirably cheerful
and hopeful, and his jealousy all dissolved in the interest of
approaching combat.

“Nor they won’t miss us nuther,” laughed Major Gahogan. “Betther slide
our infantree into thim wuds, push up our skirmishers, play wid our guns
for an hour, an’ thin rowl in a couple o’ col’ms.”

There was a general murmur of approval. The limits of volunteer
invention in tactics had been reached by Gahogan. The other regimental
commanders looked upon him as their superior in the art of war.

“That would be well, Major, if we could do nothing better,” said
Waldron. “But I do not feel obliged to attack the front seriously
at all. The rebels have been thoughtless enough to leave that long
semicircle of wooded knolls unoccupied, even by scouts. It stretches
from the front of their centre clear around their right flank. I shall
use it as a veil to cover us while we get into position. I shall throw
out a regiment, a battery, and five companies of cavalry, to make a
feint against their centre and left. With the remainder of the brigade
I shall skirt the woods, double around the right of the position, and
close in upon it front and rear.”

“Loike scissors blades upon a snip o’ paper,” shouted Gahogan, in
delight. Then he turned to Fitz Hugh, who happened to be nearest him,
and added, “I tell ye he’s got the God o’ War in um. He’s the burnin’
bussh of humanity, wid a God o’ Battles inside on’t.”

“But how if they come down on our thin right wing?” asked a cautious
officer, Taylor, of the Eighth. “They might smash it and seize our line
of retreat.”

“Men who have taken up a strong position, a position obviously chosen
for defence, rarely quit it promptly for an attack,” replied Waldron.
“There is not one chance in ten that these gentlemen will make a
considerable forward movement early in the fight. Only the greatest
geniuses jump from the defensive to the offensive. Besides, we must hold
the wood. So long as we hold the wood in front of their centre we save
the road.”

Then came personal and detailed instructions. Each regimental commander
was told whither he should march, the point where he should halt to
form line, and the direction by which he should attack. The mass of
the command was to advance in marching column toward a knoll where the
highway entered and traversed the wood. Some time before reaching
it Taylor was to deploy the Eighth to the right, throw out a strong
skirmish line and open fire on the enemy’s centre and left, supported by
the battery of Parrotts, and, if pushed, by five companies of cavalry.
The remaining troops would reach the knoll, file to the left under cover
of the forest, skirt it for a mile as rapidly as possible, infold the
right of the Confederate position, and then move upon it concentrically.
Counting from the left, the Tenth, the Seventh, and the Fourteenth were
to constitute the first line of battle, while five companies of cavalry,
then the First, and then the Fifth formed the second line. Not until
Gahogan might have time to wind into the enemy’s right rear should
Gildersleeve move out of the wood and commence the real attack.

“You will go straight at the front of their right,” said Waldron, with
a gay smile, to this latter Colonel. “Send up two companies as
skirmishers. The moment they are clearly checked, lead up the other
eight in line. It will be rough work. But keep pushing. You won’t have
fifteen minutes of it before Thomas, on your left, will be climbing the
end of the ridge to take the rebels in flank. In fifteen minutes more
Gahogan will be running in on their backs. Of course, they will try to
change front and meet us. But they have extended their line a long way
in order to cover the whole ridge. They will not be quick enough. We
shall get hold of their right, and we shall roll them up. Then, Colonel
Stilton, I shall expect to see the troopers jumping into the gaps and
making prisoners.”

“All right, Colonel,” answered Stilton in that hoarse growl which is apt
to mark the old cavalry officer. “Where shall we find you if we want a
fresh order?”

“I shall be with Colburn, in rear of Gildersleeve. That is our centre.
But never mind me; you know what the battle is to be, and you know how
to fight it. The whole point with the infantry is to fold around the
enemy’s right, go in upon it concentrically, smash it, and roll up their
line. The cavalry will watch against the infantry being flanked, and
when the latter have seized the hill, will charge for prisoners. The
artillery will reply to the enemy’s guns with shell, and fire grape at
any offensive demonstration. You all know your duties, now, gentlemen.
Go to your commands, and march!”

The colonels saluted and started off at a gallop. In a few minutes
twenty-five hundred men were in simultaneous movement. Five companies of
cavalry wheeled into column of companies, and advanced at a trot through
the fields, seeking to gain the shelter of the forest. The six infantry
regiments slid up alongside of each other, and pushed on in six parallel
columns of march, two on the right of the road and four on the left. The
artillery, which alone left the highway, followed at a distance of two
or three hundred yards. The remaining cavalry made a wide detour to the
right as if to flank the enemy’s left.

It was a mile and a quarter--it was a march of fully twenty minutes--to
the edge of the woodland, the proposed cover of the column. Ten minutes
before this point was reached a tiny puff of smoke showed on the brow of
the hostile ridge; then, at an interval of several seconds, followed the
sound of a distant explosion; then, almost immediately, came the screech
of a rifled shell. Every man who heard it swiftly asked himself, “Will
it strike _me?_” But even as the words were thought out it had passed,
high in air, clean to the rear, and burst harmlessly. A few faces turned
upward and a few eyes glanced backward, as if to see the invisible
enemy. But there was no pause in the column; it flowed onward quietly,
eagerly, and with business-like precision; it gave forth no sound but
the trampling of feet and the muttering of the officers. “Steady, men!
For-ward, men!”

The Confederates, however, had got their range. A half minute later four
puffs of smoke dotted the ridge, and a flight of hoarse humming shrieks
tore the air. A little aureole cracked and splintered over the First,
followed by loud cries of anguish and a brief, slight confusion. The
voice of an officer rose sharply out of the flurry, “Close up, Company
A! Forward, men!” The battalion column resumed its even formation in an
instant, and tramped unitedly onward, leaving behind it two quivering
corpses and a wounded man who tottered rearward.

Then came more screeches, and a shell exploded over the highroad,
knocking a gunner lifeless from his carriage. The brigade commander
glanced anxiously along his batteries, and addressed a few words to his
chief of artillery. Presently the four Napoleons set forward at a gallop
for the wood, while the four Parrotts wheeled to the right, deployed,
and advanced across the fields, inclining toward the left of the enemy.
Next Taylor’s regiment (the Eighth) halted, fronted, faced to the right,
and filed off in column of march at a double-quick until it had gained
the rear of the Parrotts, when it fronted again, and pushed on in
support. A quarter of a mile further on these guns went into battery
behind the brow of a little knoll, and opened fire. Four companies
of the Eighth spread out to the right as skirmishers, and commenced
stealing toward the ridge, from time to time measuring the distance with
rifle-balls. The remainder of the regiment lay down in line between
the Parrotts and the forest. Far away to the right, five companies of
cavalry showed themselves, manoeuvring as if they proposed to turn the
left flank of the Southerners. The attack on this side was in form and
in operation.

Meantime the Confederate fire had divided. Two guns pounded away at
Taylor’s feint, while two shelled the main column. The latter was struck
repeatedly; more than twenty men dropped silent or groaning out of
the hurrying files; but the survivors pushed on without faltering and
without even caring for the wounded. At last a broad belt of green
branches rose between the regiments and the ridge; and the rebel
gunners, unable to see their foe, dropped suddenly into silence.

Here it appeared that the road divided. The highway traversed the
forest, mounted the slope beyond and dissected the enemy’s position,
while a branch road turned to the left and skirted the exterior of the
long curve of wooded hillocks. At the fork the battery of Napoleons had
halted, and there it was ordered to remain for the present in quiet.
There, too, the Fourteenth filed in among the dense greenery, threw out
two companies of skirmishers toward the ridge, and pushed slowly after
them into the shadows.

“Get sight of the enemy at once!” was Wal-dron’s last word to
Gildersleeve. “If they move down the slope, drive them back. But don’t
commence your attack under half an hour.”

Next he filed the Fifth to the thickets, saying to Colburn, “I want you
to halt a hundred yards to the left and rear of Gildersleeve. Cover his
flank if he is attacked; but otherwise lie quiet. As soon as he charges,
move forward to the edge of the wood, and be ready to support him. But
make no assault yourself until further orders.”

The next two regiments--the Seventh and First--he placed in _échelon_,
in like manner, a quarter of a mile further along. Then he galloped
forward to the cavalry, and a last word with Stilton. “You and Gahogan
must take care of yourselves. Push on four or five hundred yards, and
then face to the right. Whatever Gahogan finds let him go at it. If he
can’t shake it, help him. You two _must_ reach the top of the ridge.
Only, look out for your left flank. Keep a squadron or two in reserve on
that side.”

“Currnel, if we don’t raich the top of the hill, it’ll be because
it hasn’t got wan,” answered Gahogan. Stilton only laughed and rode
forward.

Waldron now returned toward the fork of the road. On the way he sent a
staff officer to the Seventh with renewed orders to attack as soon as
possible after Gildersleeve. Then another staff officer was hurried
forward to Taylor with directions to push his feint strongly, and drive
his skirmishers as far up the slope as they could get. A third staff
officer set the Parrotts in rear of Taylor to firing with all their
might. By the time that the commandant had returned to Col-burn’s
ambushed ranks, no one was with him but his enemy, Fitz Hugh.

“You don’t seem to trust me with duty, Colonel,” said the young man.

“I shall use you only in case of extremity, Captain,” replied Waldron.
“We have business to settle to-morrow.”

“I ask no favors on that account. I hope you will offer me none.”

“In case of need I shall spare no one,” declared Waldron.

Then he took out his watch, looked at it impatiently, put it to his ear,
restored it to his pocket, and fell into an attitude of deep attention.
Evidently his whole mind was on his battle, and he was waiting,
watching, yearning for its outburst.

“If he wins this fight,” thought Fitz Hugh, “how can I do him a harm?
And yet,” he added, “how can I help it?”

Minutes passed. Fitz Hugh tried to think of his injury, and to steel
himself against his chief. But the roar of battle on the right, and the
suspense and imminence of battle on the left, absorbed the attention of
even this wounded and angry spirit, as, indeed, they might have
absorbed that of any being not more or less than human. A private wrong,
insupportable though it might be, seemed so small amid that deadly
clamor and awful expectation! Moreover, the intellect which worked so
calmly and vigorously by his side, and which alone of all things near
appeared able to rule the coming crisis, began to dominate him, in spite
of his sense of injury. A thought crossed him to the effect that the
great among men are too valuable to be punished for their evil deeds.
He turned to the absorbed brigade commander, now not only his ruler,
but even his protector, with a feeling that he must accord him a word
of peace, a proffer in some form of possible forgiveness and friendship.
But the man’s face was clouded and stern with responsibility and
authority. He seemed at that moment too lofty to be approached with a
message of pardon. Fitz Hugh gazed at him with a mixture of prof ound
respect and smothered hate. He gazed, turned away, and remained silent.

Minutes more passed. Then a mounted orderly dashed up at full speed,
with the words, “Colonel, Major Gahogan has fronted.”

“Has he?” answered Waldron, with a smile which thanked the trooper and
made him happy. “Ride on through the thicket here, my man, and tell
Colonel Gildersleeve to push up his skirmishers.”

With a thud of hoofs and a rustling of parting foliage the cavalryman
disappeared amid the underwood. A minute or two later a thin, dropping
rattle of musketry, five hundred yards or so to the front, announced
that the sharpshooters of the Fourteenth were at work. Almost
immediately there was an angry response, full of the threatenings and
execution of death. Through the lofty leafage tore the screech of a
shell, bursting with a sharp crash as it passed overhead, and scattering
in humming slivers. Then came another, and another, and many more,
chasing each other with hoarse hissings through the trembling air, a
succession of flying serpents. The enemy doubtless believed that nearly
the whole attacking force was massed in the wood around the road, and
they had brought at least four guns to bear upon that point, and were
working them with the utmost possible rapidity. Presently a large
chestnut, not fifty yards from Fitz Hugh, was struck by a shot. The
solid trunk, nearly three feet in diameter, parted asunder as if it were
the brittlest of vegetable matter. The upper portion started aside with
a monstrous groan, dropped in a standing posture to the earth, and then
toppled slowly, sublimely prostrate, its branches crashing and all its
leaves wailing. Ere long, a little further to the front, another Anak of
the forest went down; and, mingled with the noise of its sylvan agony,
there arose sharp cries of human suffering. Then Colonel Colburn, a
broad-chested and ruddy man of thirty-five, with a look of indignant
anxiety in his iron-gray eyes, rode up to the brigade commander.

“This is very annoying, Colonel,” he said. “I am losing my men without
using them. That last tree fell into my command.”

“Are they firing toward our left?” asked Waldron.

“Not a shot.”

“Very good,” said the chief, with a sigh of contentment. “If we can only
keep them occupied in this direction! By the way, let your men lie down
under the fallen tree, as far as it will go. It will protect them from
others.”

Colburn rode back to his regiment. Waldron looked impatiently at his
watch. At that moment a fierce burst of line firing arose in front,
followed and almost overborne by a long-drawn yell, the scream of
charging men. Waldron put up his watch, glanced excitedly at Fitz Hugh,
and smiled.

“I must forgive or forget,” the latter could not help saying to himself.
“All the rest of life is nothing compared with this.”

“Captain,” said Waldron, “ride off to the left at full speed. As soon as
you hear firing at the shoulder of the ridge, return instantly and let
me know.”

Fitz Hugh dashed away. Three minutes carried him into perfect peace,
beyond the whistling of ball or the screeching of shell. On the right
was a tranquil, wide waving of foliage, and on the left a serene
landscape of cultivated fields, with here and there an embowered
farm-house. Only for the clamor of artillery and musketry far behind
him, he could not have believed in the near presence of battle, of blood
and suffering and triumphant death. But suddenly he heard to his right,
assaulting and slaughtering the tranquillity of nature, a tumultuous
outbreak of file firing, mingled with savage yells. He wheeled, drove
spurs into his horse, and flew back to Waldron. As he re-entered the
wood he met wounded men streaming through it, a few marching alertly
upright, many more crouching and groaning, some clinging to their less
injured comrades, but all haggard in face and ghastly.

“Are we winning?” he hastily asked of one man who held up a hand with
three fingers gone and the bones projecting in sharp spikes through
mangled flesh.

“All right, sir; sailing in,” was the answer.

“Is the brigade commander all right?” he inquired of another who was
winding a bloody handkerchief around his arm.

“Straight ahead, sir; hurrah for Waldron!” responded the soldier, and
almost in the same instant fell lifeless with a fresh ball through his
head.

“Hurrah for him!” Fitz Hugh answered frantically, plunging on through
the underwood. He found Waldron with Colburn, the two conversing
tranquilly in their saddles amid hissing bullets and dropping branches.

“Move your regiment forward now,” the brigade commander was saying; “but
halt it in the edge of the wood.”

“Shan’t I relieve Gildersleeve if he gets beaten?” asked the subordinate
officer eagerly.

“No. The regiments on the left will help him out. I want your men and
Peck’s for the fight on top of the hill. Of course the rebels will try
to retake it; then I shall call for you.”

Fitz Hugh now approached and said, “Colonel, the Seventh has attacked in
force.”

“Good!” answered Waldron, with that sweet smile of his which thanked
people who brought him pleasant news. “I thought I heard his fire.
Gahogan will be on their right rear in ten minutes. Then we shall get
the ridge. Ride back now to Major Bradley, and tell him to bring his
Napoleons through the wood, and set two of them to shelling the enemy’s
centre. Tell him my idea is to amuse them, and keep them from changing
front.”

Again Fitz Hugh galloped off as before on a comfortably safe errand,
safer at all events than many errands of that day. “This man is sparing
my life,” he said to himself. “Would to God I knew how to spare his!”

He found Bradley lunching on a gun caisson, and delivered his orders.
“Something to do at last, eh?” laughed the rosy-cheeked youngster. “The
smallest favors thankfully received. Won’t you take a bite of rebel
chicken, Captain? This rebellion must be put down. No? Well, tell the
Colonel I am moving on, and John Brown’s soul not far ahead.”

When Fitz Hugh returned to Waldron he found him outside of the wood, at
the base of the long incline which rose into the rebel position. About
the slope were scattered prostrate forms, most numerous near the bottom,
some crawling slowly rearward, some quiescent. Under the brow of the
ridge, decimated and broken into a mere skirmish line sheltered in knots
and singly, behind rocks and knolls, and bushes, lay the Fourteenth
Regiment, keeping up a steady, slow fire. From the edge above, smokily
dim against a pure, blue heaven, answered another rattle of musketry,
incessant, obstinate, and spiteful. The combatants on both sides were
lying down; otherwise neither party could have lasted ten minutes. From
Fitz Hugh’s point of view not a Confederate uniform could be seen. But
the smoke of their rifles made a long gray line, which was disagreeably
visible and permanent; and the sharp _whit! whit!_ of their bullets
continually passed him, and cheeped away in the leafage behind.

“Our men can’t get on another inch,” he ventured to say to his
commander. “Wouldn’t it be well for me to ride up and say a cheering
word?”

“Every battle consists largely in waiting,” replied Waldron
thoughtfully. “They have undoubtedly brought up a reserve to face
Thomas. But when Gahogan strikes the flank of the reserve, we shall
win.”

“I wish you would take shelter,” begged Fitz Hugh. “Everything depends
on your life.”

“My life has been both a help and a hurt to my fellow-creatures,” sighed
the brigade commander. “Let come what will to it.”

He glanced upward with an expression of profound emotion; he was
evidently fighting two battles, an outward and an inward one.

Presently he added, “I think the musketry is increasing on the left.
Does it strike you so?”

He was all eagerness again, leaning forward with an air of earnest
listening, his face deeply flushed and his eye brilliant. Of a sudden
the combat above rose and swelled into higher violence. There was a
clamor far away--it seemed nearly a mile away--over the hill. Then
the nearer musketry--first Thomas’s on the shoulder of the ridge, next
Gildersleeve’s in front--caught fire and raged with new fury.

Waldron laughed outright. “Gahogan has reached them,” he said to one of
his staff who had just rejoined him. “We shall all be up there in five
minutes. Tell Colburn to bring on his regiment slowly.”

Then, turning to Fitz Hugh, he added, “Captain, we will ride forward.”

They set off at a walk, now watching the smoking brow of the eminence,
now picking their way among dead and wounded. Suddenly there was a shout
above them and a sudden diminution of the firing; and looking upward
they saw the men of the Fourteenth running confusedly toward the summit.
Without a word the brigade commander struck spurs into his horse and
dashed up the long slope at a run, closely followed by his enemy and
aid. What they saw when they overtook the straggling, running, panting,
screaming pellmell of the Fourteenth was victory!

The entire right wing of the Confederates, attacked on three sides at
once, placed at enormous disadvantage, completely outgeneraled, had
given way in confusion, was retreating, breaking, and flying. There
were lines yet of dirty gray or butternut; but they were few, meagre,
fluctuating, and recoiling, and there were scattered and scurrying men
in hundreds. Three veteran and gallant regiments had gone all to wreck
under the shock of three similar regiments far more intelligently
directed. A strong position had been lost because the heroes who held it
could not perform the impossible feat of forming successively two fresh
fronts under a concentric fire of musketry. The inferior brain power had
confessed the superiority of the stronger one.

On the victorious side there was wild, clamorous, fierce exultation. The
hurrying, shouting, firing soldiers, who noted their commander riding
among them, swung their rifles or their tattered hats at him, and
screamed “Hurrah!” No one thought of the Confederate dead underfoot, nor
of the Union dead who dotted the slope behind. “What are you here
for, Colonel?” shouted rough old Gildersleeve, one leg of his trousers
dripping blood. “We can do it alone.”

“It is a battle won,” laughed Fitz Hugh, almost worshiping the man whom
he had come to slay.

“It is a battle won, but not used,” answered Waldron. “We haven’t a gun
yet, nor a flag. Where is the cavalry? Why isn’t Stilton here? He must
have got afoul of the enemy’s horse, and been obliged to beat it off.
Can anybody hear anything of Stilton?”

“Let him go,” roared Old Grumps. “The infantry don’t want any help.”

“Your regiment has suffered, Colonel,” answered Waldron, glancing at the
scattered files of the Fourteenth. “Halt it and reorganize it, and
let it fall in with the right of the First when Peck comes up. I shall
replace you with the Fifth. Send your Adjutant back to Colburn and tell
him to hurry along. Those fellows are making a new front over there,”
 he added, pointing to the centre of the hill. “I want the Fifth, Seventh
and Tenth in _échelon_ as quickly as possible. And I want that cavalry.
Lieutenant,” turning to one of his staff, “ride off to the left and find
Colonel Stilton. Tell him that I need a charge in ten minutes.”

Presently cannon opened from that part of the ridge still held by the
Confederates, the shell tearing through or over the dissolving groups
of their right wing, and cracking viciously above the heads of the
victorious Unionists. The explosions followed each other with stunning
rapidity, and the shrill whirring of the splinters was ominous. Men
began to fall again in the ranks or to drop out of them wounded. Of all
this Waldron took no further note than to ride hastily to the brow of
the ridge and look for his own artillery.

“See how he attinds to iverything himself,” said Major Gahogan, who
had cantered up to the side of Fitz Hugh. “It’s just a matther of plain
business, an’ he looks after it loike a business man. Did ye see us,
though, Captin, whin we come in on their right flank? By George, we
murthered urn. There’s more’n a hundred lyin’ in hapes back there. As
for old Stilton, I just caught sight of um behind that wood to our left,
an’ he’s makin’ for the enemy’s right rair. He’ll have lots o’ prisoners
in half an hour.”

When Waldron returned to the group he was told of his cavalry’s
whereabouts, and responded to the information with a smile of
satisfaction.

“Bradley is hurrying up,” he said, “and Taylor is pushing their left
smartly. They will make one more tussle to recover their line of
retreat; but we shall smash them from end to end and take every gun.”

He galloped now to his infantry, and gave the word “Forward!” The three
regiments which composed the _échelon_ were the Fifth on the right, the
Seventh fifty yards to the rear and left of the Fifth, the Tenth to
the rear and left of the Seventh. It was behind the Fifth, that is, the
foremost battalion, that the brigade commander posted himself.

“Do _you_ mean to stay here, Colonel?” asked Fitz Hugh, in surprise and
anxiety.

“It is a certain victory now,” answered Wal-dron, with a singular glance
upward. “My life is no longer important. I prefer to do my duty to the
utmost in the sight of all men.”

“I shall follow you and do mine, sir,” said the Captain, much moved, he
could scarcely say by what emotions, they were so many and conflicting.

“I want you otherwheres. Ride to Colonel Taylor at once, and hurry him
up the hill. Tell him the enemy have greatly weakened their left. Tell
him to push up everything, infantry, and cavalry, and artillery, and to
do it in haste.”

“Colonel, this is saving my life against my will,” remonstrated Fitz
Hugh.

“Go!” ordered Waldron, imperiously. “Time is precious.”

Fitz Hugh dashed down the slope to the right at a gallop. The brigade
commander turned tranquilly, and followed the march of his _échelon_.
The second and decisive crisis of the little battle was approaching,
and to understand it we must glance at the ground on which it was to
be fought. Two hostile lines were marching toward each other along
the broad, gently rounded crest of the hill and at right angles to its
general course. Between these lines, but much the nearest to the Union
troops, a spacious road came up out of the forest in front, crossed the
ridge, swept down the smooth decline in rear, and led to a single wooden
bridge over a narrow but deep rivulet. On either hand the road was
hedged in by a close board fence, four feet or so in height. It was for
the possession of this highway that the approaching lines were about
to shed their blood. If the Confederates failed to win it all their
artillery would be lost, and their army captured or dispersed.

The two parties came on without firing. The soldiers on both sides were
veterans, cool, obedient to orders, intelligent through long service,
and able to reserve all their resources for a short-range and final
struggle. Moreover, the fences as yet partially hid them from each
other, and would have rendered all aim for the present vague and
uncertain.

“Forward, Fifth!” shouted Waldron. “Steady. Reserve your fire.” Then, as
the regiment came up to the fence, he added, “Halt; right dress. Steady,
men.”

Meantime he watched the advancing array with an eager gaze. It was a
noble sight, full of moral sublimity, and worthy of all admiration. The
long, lean, sunburned, weather-beaten soldiers, in ragged gray stepped
forward, superbly, their ranks loose, but swift and firm, the men
leaning forward in their haste, their tattered slouch hats pushed
backward, their whole aspect business-like and virile. Their line was
three battalions strong, far outflanking the Fifth, and at least equal
to the entire _échelon_. When within thirty or forty yards of the
further fence they increased their pace to nearly a double-quick, many
of them stooping low in hunter fashion, and a few firing. Then Waldron
rose in his stirrups and yelled, “Battalion! ready--aim--aim low. Fire!”

There was a stunning roar of three hundred and fifty rifles, and a
deadly screech of bullets. But the smoke rolled out, the haste to reload
was intense, and none could mark what execution was done. Whatever the
Confederates may have suffered, they bore up under the volley, and
they came on. In another minute each of those fences, not more than
twenty-five yards apart, was lined by the shattered fragment of a
regiment, each firing as fast as possible into the face of the other.

The Fifth bled fearfully: it had five of its ten company commanders shot
dead in three minutes; and its loss in other officers and in men fell
scarcely short of this terrible ratio. On its left the Seventh and the
Tenth were up, pouring in musketry, and receiving it in a fashion hardly
less sanguinary. No one present had ever seen, or ever afterward saw,
such another close and deadly contest.

But the strangest thing in this whole wonderful fight was the conduct
of the brigade commander. Up and down the rear of the lacerated Fifth
Waldron rode thrice, spurring his plunging and wounded horse close to
the yelling and fighting file-closers, and shouting in a piercing voice
encouragement to his men. Stranger still, considering the character
which he had borne in the army, and considering the evil deed for which
he was to account on the morrow, were the words which he was distinctly
and repeatedly heard to utter. “Stand steady, men--God is with us!” was
the extraordinary battle-cry of this backslidden clergyman, this sinner
above many.

And it was a prophecy of victory. Bradley ran up his Napoleons on the
right in the nick of time, and, although only one of them could be
brought to bear, it was enough; the grape raked the Confederate left,
broke it, and the battle was over. In five minutes more their whole
array was scattered, and the entire position open to galloping cavalry,
seizing guns, standards, and prisoners.

It was in the very moment of triumph, just as the stubborn Southern line
reeled back from the fence in isolated clusters, that the miraculous
immunity of Waldron terminated, and he received his death wound. A
quarter of an hour later Fitz Hugh found a sorrowful group of officers
gazing from a little distance upon their dying commander.

“Is the Colonel hit?” he asked, shocked and grieved, incredible as the
emotion may seem.

“Don’t go near him,” called Gildersleeve, who, it will be remembered,
knew or guessed his errand in camp. “The chaplain and surgeon are there.
Let him alone.”

“He’s going to render his account,” added Ga-hogan. “An’ whativer he’s
done wrong, he’s made it square to-day. Let um lave it to his brigade.”

Adjutant Wallis, who had been blubbering aloud, who had cursed the
rebels and the luck energetically, and who had also been trying to pray
inwardly, groaned out, “This is our last victory. You see if it ain’t.
Bet you two to one.”

“Hush, man!” replied Gahogan. “We’ll win our share of um, though we’ll
have to work harder for it. We’ll have to do more ourselves, an’ get
less done for us in the way of tactics.”

“That’s so, Major,” whimpered a drummer, looking up from his duty of
attending to a wounded comrade. “He knowed how to put his men in the
right place, and his men knowed when they was in the right place. But
it’s goin’ to be uphill through the steepest part of hell the rest of
the way.”

Soldiers, some of them weeping, some of them bleeding, arrived
constantly to inquire after their commander, only to be sent quietly
back to their ranks or to the rear. Around lay other men--dead men,
and senseless, groaning men--all for the present unnoticed. Everything,
except the distant pursuit of the cavalry, waited for Wal-dron to die.
Fitz Hugh looked on silently with the tears of mingled emotions in his
eyes, and with hopes and hatreds expiring in his heart. The surgeon
supported the expiring victor’s head, while Chaplain Colquhoun knelt
beside him, holding his hand and praying audibly. Of a sudden the
petition ceased, both bent hastily toward the wounded man, and after
what seemed a long time exchanged whispers. Then the Chaplain rose, came
slowly toward the now advancing group of officers, his hands outspread
toward heaven in an attitude of benediction, and tears running down his
haggard white face.

“I trust, dear friends,” he said, in a tremulous voice, “that all is
well with our brother and commander. His last words were, ‘God is with
us.’”

“Oh! but, man, _that_ isn’t well,” broke out Gahogan, in a groan. “What
did ye pray for his soul for? Why didn’t ye pray for his loife?”

Fitz Hugh turned his horse and rode silently away. The next day he was
seen journeying rearward by the side of an ambulance, within which lay
what seemed a strangely delicate boy, insensible, and, one would say,
mortally ill.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brigade Commander, by J. W. Deforest

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BRIGADE COMMANDER ***

***** This file should be named 23182-0.txt or 23182-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/1/8/23182/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
