The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Old Folks' Party, by Edward Bellamy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Old Folks' Party
       1898

Author: Edward Bellamy

Release Date: September 21, 2007 [EBook #22710]
Last Updated: March 8, 2018

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD FOLKS' PARTY ***




Produced by David Widger





THE OLD FOLKS' PARTY

By Edward Bellamy

1898


“And now what shall we do next Wednesday evening?” said Jessie Hyde, in
a business-like tone. “It is your turn, Henry, to suggest.”

Jessie was a practical, energetic young lady, whose blue eyes never
relapsed into the dreaminess to which that color is subject. She
furnished the “go” for the club. Especially she furnished the “go” for
Henry Long, who had lots of ideas, but without her to stir him up was as
dull as a flint without a steel.

There were six in the club, and all were present to-night in Jessie's
parlor. The evening had been given to a little music, a little dancing,
a little card-playing, and a good deal of talking. It was near the hour
set by the club rule for the adjournment of its reunions, and the party
had drawn their chairs together to consult upon the weekly recurring
question, what should be done at the next meeting by way of special
order of amusement. The programmes were alternately reading, singing,
dancing, whist; varied with evenings of miscellaneous sociality like
that which had just passed. The members took turns in suggesting
recreations. To-night it was Henry Long's turn, and to him accordingly
the eyes of the group turned at Jessie's question.

“Let's have an old folks' party,” was his answer.

Considering that all of the club were yet at ages when they celebrated
their birthdays with the figure printed on the cake, the suggestion
seemed sufficiently irrelevant.

“In that case,” said Frank Hays, “we shall have to stay at home.”

Frank was an alert little fellow, with a jaunty air, to whom, by tacit
consent, all the openings for jokes were left, as he had a taste that
way.

“What do you mean, Henry?” inquired George Townsley, a thick-set, sedate
young man, with an intelligent, but rather phlegmatic look.

“My idea is this,” said Henry, leaning back in his chair, with his hands
clasped behind his head, and his long legs crossed before him. “Let us
dress up to resemble what we expect to look like fifty years hence, and
study up our demeanor to correspond with what we expect to be and feel
like at that time, and just call on Mary next Wednesday evening to talk
over old times, and recall what we can, if anything, of our vanished
youth, and the days when we belonged to the social club at C------.”

The others seemed rather puzzled in spite of the explanation. Jessie sat
looking at Henry in a brown study as she traced out his meaning.

“You mean a sort of ghost party,” said she finally; “ghosts of the
future, instead of ghosts of the past.”

“That's it exactly,” answered he. “Ghosts of the future are the only
sort worth heeding. Apparitions of things past are a very unpractical
sort of demonology, in my opinion, compared with apparitions of things
to come.”

“How in the world did such an odd idea come into your head?” asked
pretty Nellie Tyrrell, whose dancing black eyes were the most piquant
of interrogation points, with which it was so delightful to be punctured
that people were generally slow to gratify her curiosity.

“I was beginning a journal this afternoon,” said Henry, “and the idea of
Henry Long, aetat. seventy, looking over the leaves, and wondering about
the youth who wrote them so long ago, came up to my mind.”

Henry's suggestion had set them all thinking, and the vein was so
unfamiliar that they did not at once find much to say.

“I should think,” finally remarked George, “that such an old folks'
party would afford a chance for some pretty careful study, and some
rather good acting.”

“Fifty years will make us all not far from seventy. What shall we look
like then, I wonder?” musingly asked Mary Fellows.

She was the demurest, dreamiest of the three girls; the most of a woman,
and the least of a talker. She had that poise and repose of manner which
are necessary to make silence in company graceful.

“We may be sure of one thing, anyhow, and that is, that we shall not
look and feel at all as we do now,” said Frank. “I suppose,” he added,
“if, by a gift of second sight, we could see tonight, as in a glass,
what we shall be at seventy, we should entirely fail to recognize
ourselves, and should fall to disputing which was which.”

“Yes, and we shall doubtless have changed as much in disposition as in
appearance,” added Henry. “Now, for one, I 've no idea what sort of a
fellow my old man will turn out. I don't believe people can generally
tell much better what sort of old people will grow out of them than what
characters their children will have. A little better, perhaps, but not
much. Just think how different sets of faculties and tastes develop and
decay, come into prominence and retire into the background, as the years
pass. A trait scarcely noticeable in youth tinges the whole man in age.”

“What striking dramatic effects are lost because the drama of life is
spun out so long instead of having the ends brought together,” observed
George. “The spectators lose the force of the contrasts because they
forget the first part of every rôle before the latter part is reached.
One fails in consequence to get a realizing sense of the sublime
inconsistencies of every lifetime.”

“That difficulty is what we propose, in a small way, to remedy next
Wednesday night,” replied Henry.

Mary professed some scruples. It was so queer, she thought it must be
wrong. It was like tempting Providence to take for granted issues in his
hands, and masquerade with uncreated things like their own yet unborn
selves. But Frank reminded her that the same objection would apply to
any arrangement as to what they should do next week.

“Well, but,” offered Jessie, “is it quite respectful to make sport of
old folks, even if they are ourselves?”

“My conscience is clear on that point,” said Frank. “It's the only way
we can get even with them for the deprecating, contemptuous way in which
they will allude to us over their snuff and tea, as callow and flighty
youth, if indeed they deign to remember us at all, which is n't likely.”

“I 'm all tangled up in my mind,” said Nellie, with an air of
perplexity, “between these old people you are talking about and
ourselves. Which is which? It seems odd to talk of them in the third
person, and of ourselves in the first. Are n't they ourselves too?”

“If they are, then certainly we are not,” replied Henry. “You may take
your choice.

“The fact is,” he added, as she looked still more puzzled, “there are
half-a dozen of each one of us, or a dozen if you please, one in fact
for each epoch of life, and each slightly or almost wholly different
from the others. Each one of these epochs is foreign and inconceivable
to the others, as ourselves at seventy now are to us. It's as hard to
suppose ourselves old as to imagine swapping identities with another.
And when we get old it will be just as hard to realize that we were
ever young. So that the different periods of life are to all intents and
purposes different persons, and the first person of grammar ought to
be used only with the present tense. What we were, or shall be, or do,
belongs strictly to the third person.”

“You would make sad work of grammar with that notion,” said Jessie,
smiling.

“Grammar needs mending just there,” replied Henry. “The three persons of
grammar are really not enough. A fourth is needed to distinguish the
ego of the past and future from the present ego, which is the only true
one.”

“Oh, you're getting altogether too deep for me,” said Jessie. “Come,
girls, what in the world are we going to get to wear next Wednesday?”

“Sure enough!” cried they with one accord, while the musing look in
their eyes gave place to a vivacious and merry expression.

“My mother is n't near as old as we 're going to be. Her things won't
do,” said Nellie.

“Nor mine,” echoed Jessie; “but perhaps Mary's grandmother will let us
have some of her things.”

“In that case,” suggested Frank, “it will be only civil to invite her to
the party.”

“To be sure, why not?” agreed Jessie. “It is to be an 'old folks'
party, and her presence will give a reality to the thing.”

“I don't believe she 'll come,” said George. “You see being old is dead
earnest to her, and she won't see the joke.”

But Mary said she would ask her anyway, and so that was settled.

“My father is much too large in the waist for his clothes to be of any
service to me,” said George lugubriously.

But Frank reminded him that this was a hint as to his get-up, and that
he must stuff with pillows that the proverb might be fulfilled, “Like
father like son.”

And then they were rather taken aback by Henry's obvious suggestion that
there was no telling what the fashion in dress would be in a. d. 1925,
“even if,” he added, “the scientists leave us any A. D. by that time,”
 though Frank remarked here that a. d. would answer just as well as _Anno
Darwinis_, if worst came to worst. But it was decided that there was no
use trying after prophetical accuracy in dress, since it was out of
the question, and even if attainable would not suggest age to their own
minds as would the elderly weeds which they were accustomed to see.

“It's rather odd, is n't it,” said Jessie gravely, “that it did n't
occur to anybody that in all probability not over one or two of us at
most will be alive fifty years hence.”

“Let's draw lots for the two victims, and the rest of us will appear as
ghosts,” suggested Frank grimly.

“Poor two,” sighed Nellie. “I 'm sorry for them. How lonely they will
be. I'm glad I have n't got a very good constitution.”

But Henry remarked that Jessie might have gone further and said just as
truly that none of them would survive fifty years, or even ten.

“We may, some of us, escape the pang of dying as long as that,” said he,
“but that is but a trifle, and not a necessary incident of death. The
essence of mortality is change, and we shall be changed. Ten years will
see us very different persons. What though an old dotard calling himself
Henry Long is stumping around fifty years hence, what is that to me? I
shall have been dead a half century by that time.”

“The old gentleman you speak so lightly of will probably think more
tenderly of you than you do of him,” said Jessie.

“I don't believe it,” answered Henry. “In fact, if we were entirely true
to nature next Wednesday, it would spoil the fun, for we probably should
not, if actually of the age we pretend, think of our youth once a year,
much less meet to talk it over.”

“Oh, I don't think so,” protested Nellie. “I 'm sure all the story-books
and poetry say that old folks are much given to reviewing their youth in
a pensive, regretful sort of way.”

“That's all very pretty, but it 's all gammon in my opinion,” responded
Henry. “The poets are young people who know nothing of how old folks
feel, and argue only from their theory of the romantic fitness of
things. I believe that reminiscence takes up a very small part of old
persons' time. It would furnish them little excitement, for they have
lost the feelings by which their memories would have to be interpreted
to become vivid. Remembering is dull business at best. I notice that
most persons, even of eventful lives, prefer a good novel to the
pleasures of recollection. It is really easier to sympathize with the
people in a novel or drama than with our past selves. We lose a
great source of recreation just because we can't recall the past more
vividly.”

“How shockingly Henry contradicts to-night,” was the only reply Nellie
deigned to this long speech.

“What shall we call each other next Wednesday?” asked Mary. “By our
first names, as now?”

“Not if we are going to be prophetically accurate,” said Henry. “Fifty
years hence, in all probability, we shall, most of us, have altogether
forgotten our present intimacies and formed others, quite inconceivable
now. I can imagine Frank over there, scratching his bald head with his
spectacle tips, and trying to recall me. 'Hen. Long, Hen. Long,--let
me think; name sounds familiar, and yet I can't quite place him. Did n't
I know him at C------, or was it at college? Bless me, how forgetful I
'm growing!'”

They all laughed at Henry's bit of acting. Perhaps it was only sparkles
of mirth, but it might have been glances of tender confidence that shot
between certain pairs of eyes betokening something that feared not
time. This is in no sort a love story, but such things can't be wholly
prevented.

The girls, however, protested that this talk about growing so utterly
away from each other was too dismal for anything, and they would n't
believe it anyhow. The old-fashioned notions about eternal constancy
were ever so much nicer. It gave them the cold shivers to hear Henry's
ante-mortem dissection of their friendship, and that young man was
finally forced to admit that the members of the club would probably
prove exceptions to the general rule in such matters. It was agreed,
therefore, that they should appear to know each other at the old folks'
party.

“All you girls must, of course, be called 'Mrs.' instead of 'Miss,'”
 suggested Frank, “though you will have to keep your own names, that
is, unless you prefer to disclose any designs you may have upon other
people's; “for which piece of impertinence Nellie, who sat next him,
boxed his ears,--for the reader must know that these young people were
on a footing of entire familiarity and long intimacy.

“Do you know what time it is?” asked Mary, who, by virtue of the sweet
sedateness of her disposition, was rather the monitress of the company.

“It's twelve o'clock, an hour after the club's curfew.”

“Well,” remarked Henry, rousing from the fit of abstraction in which he
had been pursuing the subject of their previous discussion, “it was to
be expected we should get a little mixed as to chronology over such talk
as this.”

“With our watches set fifty years ahead, there 'll be no danger of
overstaying our time next Wednesday, anyhow,” added Frank.

Soon the girls presented themselves in readiness for outdoors, and, in a
pleasant gust of good-bys and parting jests, the party broke up.

“Good-by for fifty years,” Jessie called after them from the stoop, as
the merry couples walked away in the moonlight.

The following week was one of numerous consultations among the girls.
Grandmother Fellows's wardrobe was pretty thoroughly rummaged under that
good-natured old lady's superintendence, and many were the queer effects
of old garments upon young figures which surprised the steady-going
mirror in her quiet chamber.

“I 'm afraid I can never depend on it again,” said Mrs. Fellows.'

She had promised to be at the party.

“She looked so grave when I first asked her,” Mary explained to the
girls, “that I was sorry I spoke of it. I was afraid she thought we
wanted her only as a sort of convenience, to help out our pantomime by
the effect of her white hair. But in a minute she smiled in her cheery
way, and said, as if she saw right through me: 'I suppose, my child, you
think being old a sort of misfortune, like being hunchbacked or blind,
and are afraid of hurting my feelings, but you need n't be. The good
Lord has made it so that at whichever end of life we are, the other end
looks pretty uninteresting, and if it won't hurt your feelings to have
somebody in the party who has got through all the troubles you have yet
before you, I should be glad to come.' That was turning the tables for
us pretty neatly, eh, girls?”

The young ladies would not have had the old lady guess it for worlds,
but truth compels me to own that all that week they improved every
opportunity furtively to study Mrs. Fellows's gait and manner, with a
view to perfecting their parts.

Frank and George met a couple of times in Henry's room to smoke it
over and settle details, and Henry called on Jessie to arrange several
concerted features of the programme, and for some other reasons for
aught I know.

As each one studied his or her part and strove in imagination to
conceive how they would act and feel as old men and old women, they grew
more interested, and more sensible of the mingled pathos and absurdity
of the project, and its decided general effect of queerness. They all
set themselves to make a study of old age in a manner that had never
occurred to them before, and never does occur to most people at all.
Never before had their elderly friends received so much attention at
their hands.

In the prosecution of these observations they were impressed with the
entire lack of interest generally felt by people in the habits and
manners of persons in other epochs of life than their own. In respect
of age, as in so many other respects, the world lives on fiats, with
equally little interest in or comprehension of the levels above or below
them. And a surprising thing is that middle age is about as unable to
recall and realize youth as to anticipate age. Experience seems to go
for nothing in this matter.

They thought they noticed, too, that old people are more alike than
middle-aged people. There is something of the same narrowness and
similarity in the range of their tastes and feelings that is marked in
children. The reason they thought to be that the interests of age have
contracted to about the same scope as those of childhood before it has
expanded into maturity. The skein of life is drawn together to a point
at the two ends and spread out in the middle. Middle age is the period
of most diversity, when individuality is most pronounced. The members of
the club observed with astonishment that, however affectionately we
may regard old persons, we no more think of becoming like them than
of becoming negroes. If we catch ourselves observing their senile
peculiarities, it is in a purely disinterested manner, with a complete
and genuine lack of any personal concern, as with a state to which we
are coming.

They could not help wondering if Henry were not right about people never
really growing old, but just changing from one personality to another.
They found the strange inability of one epoch to understand or
appreciate the others, hard to reconcile with the ordinary notion of a
persistent identity.

Before the end of the week, the occupation of their minds with the
subject of old age produced a singular effect. They began to regard
every event and feeling from a double standpoint, as present and as
past, as it appeared to them and as it would appear to an old person.

Wednesday evening came at last, and a little before the hour of eight,
five venerable figures, more or less shrouded, might have been seen
making their way from different parts of the village toward the Fellows
mansion. The families of the members of the club were necessarily in the
secret, and watched their exit with considerable laughter from behind
blinds. But to the rest of the villagers it has never ceased to be a
puzzle who those elderly strangers were who appeared that evening and
were never before or since visible. For once the Argus-eyed curiosity of
a Yankee village, compared with which French or Austrian police are easy
to baffle, was fairly eluded.

Eight o'clock was the hour at which the old folks' party began, and the
reader will need a fresh introduction to the company which was assembled
at that time in Mary Fellows's parlor. Mary sat by her grandmother,
who from time to time regarded her in a half-puzzled manner, as if it
required an effort of her reasoning powers to reassure her that the
effect she saw was an illusion. The girl's brown hair was gathered back
under a lace cap, and all that appeared outside it was thickly powdered.
She wore spectacles, and the warm tint of her cheeks had given place to
the opaque saffron hue of age. She sat with her hands in her lap, their
fresh color and dimpled contour concealed by black lace half-gloves. The
fullness of her young bosom was carefully disguised by the arrangement
of the severely simple black dress she wore, which was also in other
respects studiously adapted to conceal, by its stiff and angular lines,
the luxuriant contour of her figure. As she rose and advanced to welcome
Henry and Jessie, who were the last to arrive, it was with a striking
imitation of the tremulously precipitate step of age.

Jessie, being rather taller than the others, had affected the stoop of
age very successfully. She wore a black dress spotted with white, and
her whitened hair was arranged with a high comb. She was the only one
without spectacles or eyeglasses. Henry looked older and feebler than
any of the company. His scant hair hung in thin and long white locks,
and his tall, slender figure had gained a still more meagre effect from
his dress, while his shoulders were bowed in a marked stoop; his gait
was rigid and jerky. He assisted himself with a gold-headed cane, and
sat in his chair leaning forward upon it.

George, on the other hand, had followed the hint of his father's figure
in his make-up, and appeared as a rubicund old gentleman, large in the
waist, bald, with an apoplectic tendency, a wheezy asthmatic voice, and
a full white beard.

Nellie wore her hair in a row of white curls on each side of her head,
and in every detail of her dress and air affected the coquettish old
lady to perfection, for which, of course, she looked none the younger.
Her cheeks were rouged to go with that style.

Frank was the ideal of the sprightly little old gentleman. With his
brisk air, natty eye-glasses, cane and gloves, and other items of dress
in the most correct taste, he was quite the old beau. His white hair was
crispy, brushed back, and his snowy mustache had rather a rakish effect.

Although the transformation in each case was complete, yet quite
enough of the features, expression, or bearing was apparent through the
disguise to make the members of the party entirely recognizable to each
other, though less intimate acquaintances would perhaps have been at
first rather puzzled. At Henry's suggestion they had been photographed
in their costumes, in order to compare the ideal with the actual when
they should be really old.

“It is n't much trouble, and the old folks will enjoy it some day. We
ought to consider them a little,” Henry had said, meaning by “the old
folks” their future selves.

It had been agreed that, in proper deference to the probabilities, one,
at least, of the girls ought to illustrate the fat old lady. But they
found it impossible to agree which should sacrifice herself, for no
one of the three could, in her histrionic enthusiasm, quite forget her
personal appearance. Nellie flatly refused to be made up fat, and Jessie
as flatly, while both the girls had too much reverence for the sweet
dignity of Mary Fellows's beauty to consent to her taking the part, and
so the idea was given up.

It had been a happy thought of Mary's to get her two younger sisters,
girls of eleven and sixteen, to be present, to enhance the venerable
appearance of the party by the contrast of their bloom and freshness.

“Are these your little granddaughters?” inquired Henry, benevolently
inspecting them over the tops of his spectacles as he patted the elder
of the two on the head, a liberty she would by no means have allowed
him in his proper character, but which she now seemed puzzled whether to
resent or not.

“Yes,” replied Mary, with an indulgent smile. “They wanted to see what
an old folks' party was like, though I told them they wouldn't enjoy it
much. I remember I thought old people rather dull when I was their age.”

Henry made a little conversation with the girls, asking them the list
of fatuous questions by which adults seem fated to illustrate the gulf
between them and childhood in the effort to bridge it.

“Annie, dear, just put that ottoman at Mrs. Hyde's feet,” said Mary to
one of the little girls. “I 'm so glad you felt able to come out this
evening, Mrs. Hyde! I understood you had not enjoyed good health this
summer.”

“I have scarcely been out of my room since spring, until recently,”
 replied Jessie. “Thank you, my dear” (to the little girl); “but Dr.
Sanford has done wonders for me. How is your health now, Mrs. Fellows?”

“I have not been so well an entire summer in ten years. My daughter,
Mrs. Tarbox, was saying the other day that she wished she had my
strength. You know she is quite delicate,” said Mary.

“Speaking of Dr. Sanford,” said Henry, looking at Jessie, “he is really
a remarkable man. My son has such confidence in him that he seemed quite
relieved when I had passed my grand climacteric and could get on his
list. You know he takes no one under sixty-three. By the way, governor,”
 he added, turning around with some ado, so as to face George, “I heard
he had been treating your rheumatism lately. Has he seemed to reach the
difficulty?”

“Remarkably,” replied George, tenderly stroking his right knee in an
absent manner. “Why, don't you think I walked half the way home from my
office the other day when my carriage was late?”

“I wonder you dared venture it,” said Jessie, with a shocked air. “What
if you had met with some accident!”

“That's what my son said,” answered George. “He made me promise never
to try such a thing again; but I like to show them occasionally that I'm
good for something yet.”

He said this with a “he, he,” of senile complacency, ending in an
asthmatic cough, which caused some commotion in the company. Frank
got up and slapped him on the back, and Mary sent Annie for a glass of
water.

George being relieved, and quiet once more restored, Henry said to
Frank:--

“By the way, doctor, I want to congratulate you on your son's last book.
You must have helped him to the material for so truthful a picture of
American manners in the days when we were young. I fear we have not
improved much since then. There was a simplicity, a naturalness in
society fifty years ago, that one looks in vain for now. There was, it
seems to me, much less regard paid to money, and less of morbid social
ambition. Don't you think so, Mrs. Tyrrell?”

“It's just what I was saying only the other day,” replied Nellie. “I'm
sure I don't know what we 're coming to nowadays. Girls had some modesty
when I was young,” and she shook her head with its rows of white curls
with an air of mingled reprobation and despair.

“Did you attend Professor Merryweather's lecture last evening, Mrs.
Hyde?” asked Frank, adjusting his eye-glasses and fixing Jessie with
that intensity of look by which old persons have to make up for their
failing eyesight. “The hall was so near your house, I did n't know but
you would feel like venturing out.”

“My daughters insisted on my taking advantage of the opportunity, it is
so seldom I go anywhere of an evening,” replied Jessie, “and I was very
much interested, though I lost a good deal owing to the carrying on of
a young couple in front of me. When I was a girl, young folks didn't do
their courting in public.”

Mary had not heard of the lecture, and Frank explained that it was one
of the ter-semi-centennial course on American society and politics fifty
years ago.

“By the way,” remarked George, “did you observe what difficulty they
are having in finding enough survivors of the civil war to make a
respectable squad. The papers say that not over a dozen of both armies
can probably be secured, and some of the cases are thought doubtful at
that.”

“Is it possible!” said Henry. “And yet, too, it must be so; but it
sounds strangely to one who remembers as if it were yesterday seeing
the grand review of the Federal armies at Washington just after the war.
What a host of strong men was that, and now scarcely a dozen left. My
friends, we are getting to be old people. We are almost through with
it.”

Henry sat gazing into vacancy over the tops of his spectacles, while the
old ladies wiped theirs and sniffed and sighed a little. Finally Jessie
said:--

“Those were heroic days. My little granddaughters never tire of hearing
stories about them. They are strong partisans, too. Jessie is a fierce
little rebel and Sam is an uncompromising Unionist, only they both agree
in denouncing slavery.”

“That reminds me,” said Frank, smiling, “that our little Frankie came to
me yesterday with a black eye he got for telling Judge Benson's little
boy that people of his complexion were once slaves. He had read it in
his history, and appealed to me to know if it was n't true.”

“I 'm not a bit surprised that the little Benson boy resented the
imputation,” said George. “I really don't believe that more than half
the people would be certain that slavery ever existed here, and I
'm sure that it rarely occurs to those who do know it. No doubt that
company of old slaves at the centennial--that is, if they can find
enough survivors--will be a valuable historical reminder to many.”

“Dr. Hays,” said Nellie, “will you settle a question between Mrs. Hyde
and myself? Were you in C------, it was then only a village, along
between 1870 and '80, about forty or fifty years ago?”

“No--and yet, come to think--let me see--when did you say?” replied
Frank doubtfully.

“Between 1870 and '80, as nearly as we can make out, probably about the
middle of the decade,” said Nellie.

“I think I was in C------ at about that time. I believe I was still
living with my father's family.”

“I told you so,” said Nellie to Jessie, and, turning again to Frank, she
asked:--

“Do you remember anything about a social club there?”

“I do,” replied Frank, with some appearance of interest. “I recall
something of the sort quite distinctly, though I suppose I have n't
thought of it for twenty years. How did you ever hear of it, Mrs. Hyde?”

“Why, I was a member,” replied she briskly, “and so was Mrs. Tyrrell. We
were reminded of it the other day by a discovery Mrs. Tyrrell made in an
old bureau drawer of a photograph of the members of the club in a group,
taken probably all of fifty years ago, and yellow as you can imagine.
There was one figure that resembled you, doctor, as you might have
looked then, and I thought, too, that I recalled you as one of the
members; but Mrs. Tyrrell could not, and so we agreed to settle the
matter by appealing to your own recollection.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Frank, “I now recall the club very perfectly, and it
seems to me Governor Townsley was also in it.”

“Yes, I think I was a member,” assented George, “though my recollections
are rather hazy.”

Mary and Henry, being appealed to, failed to remember anything about the
club, the latter suggesting that probably it flourished before he came
to C------. Jessie was quite sure she recalled Henry, but the others
could not do so with much positiveness.

“I will ask Mrs. Long when I get home,” said Henry. “She has always
lived at C------, and is great for remembering dates. Let's see; what
time do you think it was?”

“Mrs. Tyrrell and I concluded it must have been between. 1873 and 1877,”
 said Jessie; adding slyly, “for she was married in 1877. Mrs. Tyrrell,
did you bring that old photograph with you? It might amuse them to look
at it.”

Nellie produced a small picture, and, adjusting their spectacles and
eye-glasses, they all came forward to see it. A group of six young
people was represented, all in the very heyday of youth. The spectators
were silent, looking first at the picture, and then at each other.

“Can it be,” said Frank, “that these were ever our pictures? I hope,
Mrs. Tyrrell, the originals had the forethought to put the names on the
back, that we may be able to identify them.”

“No,” said she, “we must guess as best we can. First, who is that?”
 pointing to one of the figures.

“That must be Mrs. Hyde, for she is taller than the others,” suggested
Grandma Fellows.

“By the same token, that must be Mrs. Tyrrell, for she is shorter,” said
Jessie; “though, but for that, I don't see how we could have told them
apart.”

“How oddly they did dress in those days!” said Mary.

“Who can that be?” asked Frank, pointing to the finest-looking of the
three young men. “If that is one of us, there was more choice in our
looks than there is now,--eh, Townsley?”

“No doubt,” said George, “fifty years ago somebody's eye scanned those
features with a very keen sense of proprietorship. What a queer feeling
it would have given those young things to have anticipated that we
should ever puzzle over their identities in this way!”

They finally agreed on the identity of Jessie, Nellie, and Frank, and
of George also, on his assuring them that he was once of slender figure.
This left two figures which nobody could recognize, though Jessie
insisted that the gentleman was Henry, and Mary thought the other young
lady was a Miss Fellows, a girl of the village, who, she explained, had
died young many, many years ago.

“Don't you remember her?” she asked them, and her voice trembled with
a half-genuine sort of self-pity, as if, for a moment, she imagined
herself her own ghost.

“I recall her well,” said Frank; “tall, grave, sweet, I remember she
used to realize to me the abstraction of moral beauty when we were
studying Paley together.”

“I don't know when I have thought so much of those days as since I
received cards for your golden wedding, Judge,” said Nellie to Henry,
soon after. “How many of those who were present at your wedding will be
present at your golden wedding, do you suppose?”

“Not more than two or three,” replied Henry, “and yet the whole village
was at the wedding.”

“Thank God,” he said a moment after, “that our friends scatter before
they die. Otherwise old people like us would do nothing but attend
funerals during the last half of our lives. Parting is sad, but I prefer
to part from my friends while they are yet alive, that I may feel it
less when they die. One must manage his feelings or they will get the
better of him.”

“It is a singular sensation,” said George, “to outlive one's generation.
One has at times a guilty sense of having deserted his comrades. It
seems natural enough to outlive any one contemporary, but unnatural
to survive them as a mass,--a sort of risky thing, fraught with the
various vague embarrassments and undefined perils threatening one who
is out of his proper place. And yet one does n't want to die, though
convinced he ought to, and that's the cowardly misery of it.”

“Yes,” said Henry, “I had that feeling pretty strongly when I attended
the last reunion of our alumni, and found not one survivor within five
classes of me. I was isolated. Death had got into my rear and cut me
off. I felt ashamed and thoroughly miserable.”

Soon after, tea was served. Frank vindicated his character as an old
beau by a tottering alacrity in serving the ladies, while George and
Henry, by virtue of their more evident infirmity, sat still and allowed
themselves to be served. One or two declined tea as not agreeing with
them at that hour.

The loquacious herb gave a fresh impulse to the conversation, and the
party fell to talking in a broken, interjectory way of youthful scenes
and experiences, each contributing some reminiscence, and the others
chiming in and adding scraps, or perhaps confessing their inability to
recall the occurrences.

“What a refinement of cruelty it is,” said Henry at last, “that makes
even those experiences which were unpleasant or indifferent when passing
look so mockingly beautiful when hopelessly past.”

“Oh, that's not the right way to look at it, Judge,” broke in Grandma
Fellows, with mild reproof. “Just think rather how dull life would be,
looking forward or backward, if past or coming experiences seemed as
uninteresting as they mostly are when right at hand.”

“Sweet memories are like moonlight,” said Jessie musingly. “They make
one melancholy, however pleasing they may be. I don't see why, any more
than why moonlight is so sad, spite of its beauty; but so it is.”

The fragile tenure of the sense of personal identity is illustrated by
the ease and completeness with which actors can put themselves in the
place of the characters they assume, so that even their instinctive
demeanor corresponds to the ideal, and their acting becomes nature. Such
was the experience of the members of the club. The occupation of their
mind during the week with the study of their assumed characters had
produced an impression that had been deepened to an astonishing degree
by the striking effect of the accessories of costume and manner. The
long-continued effort to project themselves mentally into the period of
old age was assisted in a startling manner by the illusion of the senses
produced by the decrepit figures, the sallow and wrinkled faces, and the
white heads of the group.

Their acting had become spontaneous. They were perplexed and bewildered
as to their identity, and in a manner carried away by the illusion their
own efforts had created. In some of the earlier conversation of the
evening there had been occasional jests and personalities, but the
talk had now become entirely serious. The pathos and melancholy of the
retrospections in which they were indulging became real. All felt that
if it was acting now, it was but the rehearsal of a coming reality. I
think some of them were for a little while not clearly conscious that it
was not already reality, and that their youth was not forever vanished.
The sense of age was weighing on them like a nightmare. In very
self-pity voices began to tremble and bosoms heaved with suppressed
sobs.

Mary rose and stepped to the piano. It indicated how fully she had
realized her part that, as she passed the mirror, no involuntary start
testified to surprise at the aged figure it reflected. She played in a
minor key an air to the words of Tennyson's matchless piece of pathos,
--

“The days that are no more,” accompanying herself with a voice rich,
strong, and sweet. By the time she had finished, the girls were all
crying.

Suddenly Henry sprang to his feet, and, with the strained, uncertain
voice of one waking himself from a nightmare, cried:--

“Thank God, thank God, it is only a dream,” and tore off the wig,
letting the brown hair fall about his forehead. Instantly all followed
his example, and in a moment the transformation was effected. Brown,
black, and golden hair was flying free; rosy cheeks were shining through
the powder where handkerchiefs had been hastily applied, and the
bent and tottering figures of a moment ago had given place to
broad-shouldered men and full-breasted girls. Henry caught Jessie around
the waist, Frank Nellie, and George Mary, and with one of the little
girls at the piano, up and down the room they dashed to the merriest of
waltzes in the maddest round that ever was danced. There was a reckless
abandon in their glee, as if the lust of life, the glow and fire of
youth, its glorious freedom, and its sense of boundless wealth, suddenly
set free, after long repression, had intoxicated them with its strong
fumes. It was such a moment as their lifetime would not bring again.

It was not till, flushed and panting, laughing and exhausted, they came
to a pause, that they thought of Grandma Fellows. She was crying, and
yet smiling through her tears.

“Oh, grandma,” cried Mary, throwing her arms around her, and bursting
into tears, “we can't take you back with us. Oh, dear.”

And the other girls cried over her, and kissed her in a piteous, tender
way, feeling as if their hearts would break for the pity of it. And
the young men were conscious of moisture about the eyes as they stood
looking on.

But Grandma Fellows smiled cheerily, and said:--

“I'm a foolish old woman to cry, and you mustn't think it is because I
want to be young again. It's only because I can't help it.”

Perhaps she could n't have explained it better.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Old Folks' Party, by Edward Bellamy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD FOLKS' PARTY ***

***** This file should be named 22710-0.txt or 22710-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/7/1/22710/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
