The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Spinster, by Robert Hichens

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Spinster
       1905

Author: Robert Hichens

Release Date: November 8, 2007 [EBook #23410]
Last Updated: September 24, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPINSTER ***




Produced by David Widger






THE SPINSTER

By Robert Hichens

Frederick A. Stokes Company Publishers

Copyright, 1905


I had arrived at Inley Abbey that afternoon, and was sitting at dinner
with Inley and his pretty wife, whom I had not seen for five years,
since the day I was his best man, when we all heard faintly the tolling
of a church bell. Lady Inley shook her shoulders in a rather exaggerated
shudder.

“Someone dead!” said her husband.

“It’s a mistake to build a church in the grounds of a house,” Lady Inley
said in her clear, drawling soprano voice. “That noise gives me the
blues.”

“Whom can it be for?” asked Inley.

“Miss Bassett, probably,” Lady Inley replied carelessly, helping herself
to a bonbon from a little silver dish.

Inley started.

“Miss Sarah Bassett! What makes you think so?”

“Oh, while you were away in town she got ill. Didn’t you know?”

“No,” said Inley.

I could see that he was moved. His dark, short face had changed
suddenly, and he stopped eating his fruit. Lady Inley went on crunching
the bonbon between her little white teeth with all the enjoyment of a
pretty marmoset.

“Influenza,” she said airily. “And then pneumonia. Of course, at her
age, you know---- By the way, what is her age, Nino?”

“No idea,” said Inley shortly.

He was listening to the dim and monotonous sound of the church bell.

Lady Inley turned to me with the childish, confidential movement which
men considered one of her many charms.

“Miss Bassett is, or was, one of those funny old spinsters who always
look the same and always ridiculous. Dry twigs, you know. One size all
the way down. Very little hair, and no emotions. If it weren’t for the
sake of cats, one would wonder why such people are born. But they’re
always cat-lovers. I suppose that’s why they’re so often called old
cats.”

She uttered a little high-pitched laugh, and got up.

“Don’t be too long,” she said to me carelessly as I opened the
dining-room door for her. “I want to sing ‘Ohé Charmette’ to you.

“I won’t be long,” I answered, thinking what exquisite eyes she had.

She turned, and went out in her delicious, thin way. No wonder she had
made skeletons the rage in London. When I came back to the dinner-table
Inley was sitting with both his brown hands clenched on the cloth. His
black eyes--inherited from his dead mother, who had been one of the
Neapolitan aristocracy--were glittering.

“What is it, Nino?” I asked as I sat down.

We had been such intimate friends that even my five years’ absence
abroad had not built up a barrier between us.

“I wonder if it is Miss Bassett?” he said, looking at me earnestly.

“But was she a great friend of yours?” I said. “If Lady Inley’s
description of her is accurate, I can hardly imagine so.”

“Vere doesn’t know what she’s saying.”

“Then Miss Bassett----”

“Oh, she does look like that; dried up, unemotional, tame, English, even
comic.”

“The regular spinster, eh?”

“She looks it. But, damn it all, Vere has no business to say she has no
emotions, to wonder why such people are born. But she doesn’t know--Vere
doesn’t know.”

His agitation grew, and was inexplicable to me. But I knew Inley, knew
that he was bound to tell me what was on his mind. He could be reserved,
but not with me. So I took a cigar, cut the end off it deliberately,
struck a match, lighted it, and began to smoke in silence. He followed
my example quickly, and then said:

“Vere talks like that, and, but for Miss Bassett, Vere would have been
murdered two years ago.”

I started, and dropped my cigar on the table.

“Murdered!”

“Yes; and I----”

He fixed his eyes on me, and put his hand up to his throat. Nino was
half Neapolitan, and I saw a man being hanged. I picked up my cigar with
a hand that slightly shook.

“But,” I said, “I always thought Lady Inley and you were very happy
together.”

It sounded banal, even ridiculous, but I hardly knew what to say. I was
startled. The tolling of the bell, too, was getting on my nerves.

“One doesn’t write such things,” he said. “You’ve been abroad for
years.”

“It’s all right now?”

He nodded.

“I suppose so. Vere has never had the least suspicion.”

He drew his chair closer to mine, and was about to go on speaking when
the servants came in with the coffee.

“Who’s the bell tolling for, Hurst?” he said to the butler.

“I couldn’t say, my lord.”

When the servants had gone Inley continued, at first in a calmer voice:

“Miss Bassett lived in the red cottage just beyond the gate of the South
Lodge from time immemorial. You generally came to us in Scotland, I
know, but I should think you must have seen her.”

Suddenly a recollection flashed upon me--a recollection of a long, flat
figure, a drab face, thin hair coming away from a wrinkled forehead
under a mushroom hat, flapping, old-fashioned golden earrings.

“Not the person I used to call ‘the Plank’?” I said.

“Did you?”

He thought for a moment.

“Yes; I believe you did-. I’d forgotten.”

“She was always in church twenty minutes before the service began, and
always dropped her hymn-book coming out if there were visitors in the
Abbey pew!”

“Yes, yes; that’s it. Miss Bassett is very nervous in little ways.”

“I remember her now perfectly. And you say she----”

I looked at him, and hesitated.

“She saved Vere’s life and, indirectly, mine. I’ll tell you now we’re
together again at last. I shall never tell Vere.”

He looked towards the windows, across which dark blue silk curtains were
drawn, as if he could see the passing-bell swinging in the old square
tower. Then he turned to me.

“You know how mad I was about Vere. It’s always like that with me.
Unless I’m stone I’m fire. After we were married I got even madder.
Having her all to myself was like enchantment, and in Italy, too, my
other native land.”

I thought of Lady Inley’s eyes.

“I can understand,” I said.

“Of course, when we got back it had to be different. Friends came
in, and she was run after and admired and written about. You know the
publicity of life in modern London.”

“City of public-houses and society spies.”

“I bore it, because it’s supposed to be the thing. And Vere rather likes
it, somehow. So I let her have her fun, as long as it was fun. I didn’t
intend it should ever be anything else.”

He frowned. When he did that, and his thick eyebrows nearly met, he
looked all Italian.

“We did the usual things--Paris, Ascot, Scotland, and so on--till Vere
had to lie up.”

“Your boy?”

“Yes; Hugo came along. I was glad when that was over. I thought she was
going to die. You knew Seymour Glynd?”

“Life Guards? Killed hunting a year ago?”

Inley nodded.

“He was a great deal with us soon after Hugo’s birth. I thought nothing
of it. I’d known the fellow all my life. But then one nearly always
has.”

He laughed bitterly.

“To cut that part short, two years ago in autumn we had Glynd staying
with us down here for shooting. There were some others, of course--Mrs.
Jack, Bobbie Elphinton, and Lady Bobbie--but you know the lot.”

“I did.”

“Ah,” he said, “you’ve been well out of it these years. Well, the shoot
was to break up on a Friday, and I’d arranged to go to town that day
with the rest. Vere didn’t intend to come. She said she was feeling
tired, and was going to have a Friday to Monday rest cure. That’s the
thing, you know, nowadays. You get a Swedish _masseuse_ down to stay,
and go to bed and drink milk. Vere had engaged a _masseuse_ to come on
the Friday night. On the Thursday, the day before we were all going to
town, Glynd hurt his foot getting over a fence into a turnip field--at
least I thought so.”

He stopped.

“Everyone thought so, I believe--except, of course, Vere. I wonder if
they did, though?” he added moodily. “Or whether I was the only--But
what does it matter now? Glynd said he only wanted a couple of days’
rest to be all right again, and asked me if he might stay on at the
Abbey till the Monday. Of course I said ‘Yes; if he wouldn’t want a
hostess.’ Because Vere said to me, when she heard of it, that she must
have her rest cure all the same. Glynd swore he’d be quite happy alone.
So he stayed, and the rest of us came up to town on the Friday. Well,
on the Saturday morning I was walking across the park when I met the
Swedish _massense_ who was to have gone down to Vere on the Friday
night. I knew her, because Vere had often had her before in London.
‘Hullo!’ I said. ‘You ought to be down at Inley Abbey with my wife.’
‘No, my lord,’ she said. ‘Why not?’ ‘I’ve had a wire from Lady Inley not
to go.’ ‘A wire!’ I said. ‘When did you get it?’ ‘On Thursday night, my
lord.’ You mean last night?’ I said, thinking Vere must have changed her
mind after we had left. ‘No,’ said the woman; ‘on Thursday night, late.’
Then I remembered that, after Glynd had hurt his foot and asked to stay,
Vere had gone out alone for a drive in her cart, to get a last breath of
air before the rest cure. She must have sent the telegram herself then.
All of a sudden I seemed to understand a lot of things.’”

He had let his cigar out, and now he noticed that he had. He tossed it
into the fire.

“I said, ‘Good-morning’ to the woman quite quietly, went back to the
house, and told my man I shouldn’t be at home that night.”

He put his hand on my arm.

“I felt perfectly calm. Wasn’t that strange?”

I nodded.

“There was a train from town reaching Ashdridge Station at nine o’clock
at night. I took it. I didn’t care to go to Inley Station, where
everybody would know me, and wonder what I was up to. I didn’t take any
luggage. My man asked if he should pack, and I said ‘No.’ I didn’t dine.
I was at Pad-dington three-quarters of an hour before the train was
due to start. At last it came in to the platform. Going down I read the
evening papers just like any man going home from business. Soon after we
got away from London I saw there was rain on the carriage windows. That
seemed to me right. We were a little late at Ashdridge. It was still
wet, and I had my coat collar turned up. I don’t believe they recognised
me there. I set out to walk to Inley.”

“What did you mean to do?”

“I told you before.”

I looked into his face, and believed him. Then I thought of Lady Inley’s
childish, delicate beauty, of her slightly affected manner, the manner
of a woman who has always been spoilt, whose paths have been made very
smooth. And here she was living, apparently happily, with a man who had
deliberately travelled down in the night to kill her. How ignorant we
are!

“You are condemning me,” Inley said, with a touch of hot anger.

“I was only thinking----”

“Yes?”

“That we don’t know each other much in the greatest intimacy.”

“That’s what I thought then.”

He said that in a way which suddenly put me on his side. He must
have seen the change in my feelings, for he went on, with his former
unreserve:

“I walked fast in the dark. I didn’t think very much, but I remember
that all the trees--there’s a lot of woodland, you know, between
Ashdridge and Inley--seemed alive. Everything seemed to me to be alive
that night. I’ve never had that sensation before or since.”

I realised what the condition of the man had been when he said that, as
if I were a doctor and a patient had told me the symptom which put me in
possession of his malady.

“When I reached Inley it was late, and the long village street was
deserted. There were lights in the inn and in the schoolmaster’s house,
but there were no people about. I got through without meeting a soul,
and came on towards the gates of the Abbey.”

“You meant to go into the house?”

“Yes. I was sure--somehow I was sure; but I intended to see before I
acted, merely for my own justification. But I was quite sure, as if
Vere herself had told me everything. Soon after I had got clear of the
village I heard a sound of wheels behind me. I stood up against the
hedge, and in a minute or two a fly passed me going slowly. I saw the
driver’s face. It wasn’t a man from Inley. Evidently the fly had come
from a distance. It was splashed with mud, and the horse looked tired.
I followed it till it came to the turning just below Miss Bassett’s
cottage, where there’s a narrow lane going to Charfield through the
woods. It went a little way down this lane, and stopped. I waited at the
turning. I could see the light from the lamps shining on the wet road,
and in the circle of light the driver’s breath. He bent down, and I saw
him looking at a big silver watch. Then he put it back. But he didn’t
drive on. I knew what he was waiting for. Vere was going with--with
Glynd. That was more than I had ever thought of, that she would go. I
put my hand into my pocket, took out my revolver, and went on till I was
close to the red cottage. By this time the rain had stopped. I came up
to within a few yards of the Abbey gates, stood for a moment, and then
returned till I was at the wicket of Miss Bassett’s garden. It’s bounded
by a yew hedge, beyond which there is a path shaded by mulberry-trees.
The hedge is low. The path is dark. It was a blackguardly thing to do,
but I thought of nothing except myself, my wrong, and how I was to wipe
it out. I opened the wicket, came into the path, and stood there under
the mulberry-trees behind the hedge. Here I was in cover, and could see
the road. I held my revolver in my hand, and waited. It never struck me
that Miss Bassett might be up. I saw no light in the cottage, and I had
a sort of idea that people like her went to bed at about eight. While
I was standing there listening I felt something rub against my legs. It
made me start. Then I heard a little low noise. I looked down, and
there was a great cat holding up its tail and purring. Its pleasure was
horrible to me. I pushed it away with my foot, but it came back, bending
down its head, arching its back, and pressing against me. I was thinking
what to do to get rid of it when I heard a shrill, husky voice call out:

“‘Johnny--John-nee!’

“It was Miss Bassett. I held my breath, and pushed away the cat.

“‘Johnny, Johnny--John-nee!’ went the voice again.

“The cat wouldn’t leave me. God knows why it wished to stay. I was
determined to get rid of it, so I put the revolver down on the path,
picked the cat up in my arms, and dropped it over the hedge into the
road. Just as I had caught up the revolver again I was confronted by
Miss Bassett. She had come in slippers up the path in the dark to look
for her cat.”

I uttered a slight exclamation.

Inley went on: “She had a handkerchief tied over her cap and under her
chin, and a small lantern in her hands, on which she wore black mittens.
I can see her now. We stood there on the path for a minute staring at
each other without a word. The light from the lantern flickered over the
revolver, and I saw Miss Bassett look down at it.”

He stopped, poured out a glass of water, and drank it off like a man who
has been running.

“Didn’t she show surprise--fear?” I asked.

“Not a bit. Women are so extraordinary, even old women who’ve never been
in touch with life, that I’m certain now she understood directly her
eyes fell on the revolver.”

“What did she do?”

“After a minute she said: ‘Lord Inley, I’m looking for my cat. Have you
seen him?’

“‘Yes,’ I said; ‘he’s run into the house.’

“It was a lie, but I wanted her to go in. I had slipped the revolver
back into my pocket, and tried to assume a perfectly simple, natural
air. I fancied it would be very easy to impose on Miss Bassett when I
heard her question. It sounded so innocent, as if the old lady was full
of her pet. I even thought, perhaps, she had not known what the revolver
was when she looked at it.

“‘Did he run into the house?’ she said, still looking at me from under
her wrinkled eyelids.

“‘Yes; when you came out. He was here on the path with me. You called
“Johnny!” and he ran off there between the mulberry-trees.’

“All the time I was speaking to her I had an eye to the road, and my
ears were listening like an Indian’s when he puts his head to the ground
to hear the pad of his enemy.

“Miss Bassett stood there quietly for a moment as if she were
considering something. She looked prim. I remember that even now--prim
as a caricature. It was only a moment, but it seemed to me an hour. ‘If
they should come,’ I thought, ‘while she is out here!’ The sweat came
out all over my face with impatience--an agony of impatience. I longed
to take the old lady by the shoulders, push her into the cottage, lock
her in, and be alone, able to watch the bit of road from the Abbey gates
to the wicket. But I could do nothing. I was obliged to repress every
sign of agitation. It was devilish.”

He got up with a sudden jerk from his chair, and stood by the fire. Even
the telling of that moment had set beads of moisture on his square, low
forehead.

“At last she spoke again.

“‘I wonder if you’d mind coming in for a minute to help me see if Johnny
really is in the house?’ she said.

“I don’t know what I should have done--refused, I believe, refused her
with an oath, for I began to feel mad; but just at that instant up came
the cat once more, purring like fury, and lifting up his tail. He made
straight for me, and began to rub himself against my legs again.

“‘Oh!’ said Miss Bassett, ‘there he is! Naughty Johnny, naughty boy!
Lord Inley, perhaps you’d be so good as just to lif t him up and put him
inside the door for me. I always have such a job to get him to come
in of a night. He likes hunting in the woods. Doesn’t he, the naughty
Johnny?’

“‘Now’s my chance to get rid of her!’ I thought.

“I bent down, picked the cat up, and went along the path towards the
cottage, Miss Bassett following close behind me. The cat was an immense
beast, awfully heavy, and just as I turned out of the yew path to go up
to the cottage door he began struggling to get away, and scratching.
I held on to him, but it wasn’t easy, and I got my hand torn before
I dropped him down inside the little hall. Away he ran, towards the
kitchen, I suppose. Miss Bassett was very grateful, but I cut her
gratitude short.

“‘Very glad to have been able to help you,’ I said. ‘Good-night.’

“‘Good-night, Lord Inley,’ she said.

“I thought her voice sounded a little bit odd when she said that, and
I just glanced at her funny old face, lit up by the lantern she was
holding in one mittened hand. She didn’t look at me this time as she had
in the garden. Then I went out, and she immediately shut the door.

“‘Thank God!’ I thought, and I hurried to the wicket. I didn’t dare stay
in the garden now. Seeing her had made me realise my blackguardism in
coming in at all, considering my reason. I resolved to hide in the field
at the corner where the road turns off to Charfield. As I opened the
wicket, instinctively I put my hand into my pocket for my revolver.”

He bent down, looking full into my eyes.

“It wasn’t there.”

“Miss Bassett!” I exclaimed.

“In a moment I realised that Miss Bassett must have grasped the
situation; that her asking me to carry in her cat was a ruse, and that
while the beast was struggling between my hands she must have stolen
the revolver from behind. I say I knew that, and yet even then, when I
thought of her look, her manner, the sort of nervous old thing she was,
I couldn’t believe what I knew. Then I remembered her voice when she
said ‘Good-night’ to me in the passage, her eyes looking down instead of
at me, and that she was only holding the lantern in one hand, whereas
in the garden she was using two. She must have had the revolver in
her other hand concealed in the folds of her dress. I ran back to the
cottage door, and knocked--hard. Not that I thought she’d open. I knew
she wouldn’t, but she did directly. I could hardly speak. I was afraid
of myself just then. At last I said:

“‘Miss Bassett, you know what I want.’

“‘You can’t have it,’ she said, looking straight at me.

“I kept quiet for a second, then I said:

“‘Miss Bassett, I don’t think you know that you’re running into danger.’
For I felt that there was danger for her then if she went against me.
She knew it, too, perhaps better than I did. I saw her poor old hands,
all blue veins, beginning to tremble.

“‘You can’t have it, Lord Inley,’ she repeated.

“There wasn’t the ghost of a quiver in her voice.

“‘I must, I will!’ I said, and I made a movement towards her--a violent
movement I know it was.

“But the old thing stood her ground. Oh, she was a gallant old woman.

“‘Do what you like to me,’ she said. ‘I’m old. What does it matter?
She’s young.’

“Then I knew she understood.

“‘You’ve seen them together!’ I said. ‘Since I went!’

“She wouldn’t say. Not a word. I was mad. I forgot decency, everything.
I took her. I searched her for the revolver. I searched her roughly--God
forgive me. She trembled horribly, but never said a word. It wasn’t on
her. She must have hidden it somewhere in that moment when she was alone
in the cottage. That was another ruse to keep me searching in there
while-- But I saw it almost directly. I broke away, and rushed out and
down the road. Something seemed to tell me they had passed. I got into
the lane that leads to Charfield. The fly was gone. Then, all of a
sudden, I felt perfectly calm. I turned, and went up to the Abbey gates.
I knocked them up at the lodge. The keeper came out. When he saw me he
said:

“‘You, my lord! However did you know?’

“‘Go on!’ I said. ‘Know what?’

“‘About Master Hugo?’

“I didn’t say one way or the other.

“‘The doctor says it’s a bitter bad quinsy, but there’s just a chance.
Her ladyship’s nearly mad. It only came on a few hours ago quite
sudden.’

“I went up to the Abbey, and found Vere by the child’s bed. She looked
flushed, and was breathing hard, as if she had just been running.”

He stopped, and took out his cigar-case.

“Running!” I said.

“She had parted finally from Glynd in front of Miss Bassett’s cottage,”
 he said. “He told me that afterwards.”

There was a moment’s silence. Then he spoke more calmly.

“I went up to town when the child was safe, and had it out with Glynd.
They had meant to go that night. It was the boy who stopped them and
they took it as a judgment. You know how women are. Glynd swore she was
stopped in time. You understand?”

“Yes.”

“He didn’t lie to me.”

“And your wife?”

“I never spoke of it to her. I saw her with the boy, and--well, I saw
her with the boy, and what she was to him when he was close to death.”

His voice went for a moment. Then he added:

“I told her I’d had a presentiment Hugo was ill. She believed me, I
think. If not, she’s kept her secret.”

Just then the dining-room door opened, and Lady Inley put in her pretty
head.

“Are you never coming?” she said with her little childish drawl.

I got up, and went towards her.

“By the way, Nino,” she added, “the bell was for poor, funny old Miss
Bassett. What will her cat do, I wonder?”

As I followed her towards the drawing-room I heard Inley’s voice mutter
behind me:

“_Requiescat in Pace_.”






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Spinster, by Robert Hichens

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPINSTER ***

***** This file should be named 23410-0.txt or 23410-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/1/23410/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
