The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sheriffs Bluff, by Thomas Nelson Page

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Sheriffs Bluff
       1908

Author: Thomas Nelson Page

Release Date: November 16, 2007 [EBook #23510]
Last Updated: March 8, 2018

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHERIFFS BLUFF ***




Produced by David Widger






THE SHERIFFS BLUFF

By Thomas Nelson Page

Charles Scribner's Sons New York, 1908

Copyright, 1891, 1904, 1906




I

The county of H------ was an old Colonial county, and even as late as
the time of my story contained many Colonial relics. Among them were the
court-house and the jail, and, at that time, the Judge and the Sheriff.

The court-house was an old brick edifice of solemn and grayish brown,
with a portico whose mighty columns might have stood before a temple
of Minerva overlooking the Ægean Sea. With its thick walls and massive
barred windows, it might have been thought the jail, until one saw the
jail. The jail once seen stood alone. A cube of stone, each block huge
enough to have come from the Pyramid of Cheops; the windows, or rather
the apertures, were small square openings, crossed and recrossed
with great bars of wrought iron, so massive that they might have been
fashioned on the forge of the Cyclops. Looking through them from the
outside, one saw just deep enough into the narrow cavern to see another
iron grating, and catch a suspicion of the darkness beyond. The entrance
was but a slit letting into a stone-paved corridor on which opened the
grinding iron doors of the four small cells, each door a grate of huge
iron bars, heavily crossed, with openings just large enough to admit
a hand. The jail was built, not to meet the sentimental or any other
requirements of a reasonable and humane age, but in that hard time when
crime was reckoned crime, when the very names of “gaol” and “prison”
 stood for something clear and unmistakable.

The Judge of the circuit was himself a relic of the past, for his youth
had been cast among those great ones of the earth whose memory had come
down coupled with deeds so heroic and far-reaching, that even to the
next generation the actors appeared half enveloped and magnified in the
halo of tradition. His life had been one of high rectitude and dignity,
to which habits of unusual studiousness and a great work on Executors
had added a reputation for vast learning, and in his old age both in his
manner and his habit he preserved a distance and a dignity of demeanor
which lent dignity to the Bar, and surrounded him wherever he went
with a feeling akin to awe. Though he had given up the queue and short
clothes, he still retained ruffles, or what was so closely akin to them
that the difference could scarcely be discerned. Tall, grave, and with a
little bend, not in the shoulders but in the neck; with white hair just
long enough to be brushed behind in a way to suggest the knot which
had once appeared at the back; with calm, quiet eyes under bushy white
eyebrows; a face of pinkish red inherited from Saxon ancestors, who once
lived in the sun and on the brine, and a mouth and chin which bespoke
decision and self-respect in every line and wrinkle, wherever he moved
he produced an impression of one who had survived from a preceding age.
Moreover, he was a man of heroic ideals, of Spartan simplicity, and of
inflexible discipline.

If he had a weakness it was his susceptibility to feminine testimony.

The county was a secluded one--a fitting field for such a judge. And the
great meetings of the year were the sessions of the Circuit Court.

The Judge's name was then on every lip, and his passage to the
court-house was a procession.

Everyone except those unfortunates who had come under his ban, or might
be too far gone in drink to venture into his presence, drew up along
the path from the tavern to bow to him and receive his courteous bow in
return as he passed with slow and thoughtful step along, preceded by the
Sheriff and his deputies, and followed by the Bar and “the multitude.”

Whenever he entered the court or rose from the bench the lawyers stood.

If he was impressive off the bench, on the bench he was imposing.

At heart one of the kindest of men, he added to great natural dignity a
high sense of the loft-iness of a position on the bench and preserved,
with impartial and inflexible rigor, the strictest order in his court,
ruling bar and attendants alike up to a high accountability.

No one would any more have thought of taking a liberty with Judge Lomax
than he would have done it with an old lion. Just one man, possibly,
might have thought of it, but he would not have done it--and this was
Aleck Thompson, the Sheriff of the county, a jovial man past middle age,
a rubicund bachelor, who had courted half the girls in the county and
was intimate with more than half the people in the circuit. He was
daring even to rashness. He had held the office of Sheriff--not so long,
perhaps, as the Judge had sat on the bench, but, at least, since he
first stood for the place; and he could hold it as long as he wished it.
He was easily the most popular man in the county. He treated everybody
with unvarying joviality and indiscriminate generosity, and it was known
that his income, though large, was, except so much as was absolutely
necessary for his support, distributed with impartial fairness among the
people of his county, a part over the poker-table, a part over the bar,
and the balance in other popular ways. He had a face that no one could
read, and bluffed as well with a pair of treys as with four aces. But
he used to say that such a bluff was to be used rarely, and only on
important occasions.

Now and then some opposition to him would arise and a small headway
would be made against him. As, for instance, after he advised Squire
Jefford's plump and comely daughter, Mary, not to marry Dick Creel,
because Dick was too dissipated. There were some who said that the
Sheriff had designs himself on Sam Jefford's buxom, black-eyed daughter,
while others held that he was afraid of young Dick, who was an amiable
and popular young fellow, and that he did not want him to get too much
influence in the lower end of the county. However it was, Mary Jefford
not only married her young lover, but sobered him, and as she was young,
pretty, and ambitious, and worshipped her husband, Dick Creel at the
next election, to use the vernacular, “made cornsideruble show runnin'
ag'inst the Sheriff, and give him cornsideruble trouble.” Still,
Thompson was elected overwhelmingly, and few people believed Mary
Creel's charge that the Sheriff had got Dick drunk on purpose to beat
him. Thompson said, “Did n't anybody have to _git_ Dick drunk--the work
was t'other way.”




II

The session of the Circuit Court in the “------ year of the
Commonwealth,” as the writs ran, and “in the sixteenth year of Aleck
Thompson's Sheriffalty,” as that official used to say, was more than
usually important. The noted case of “_Dolittle et al. vs. Dolittle's
Executrix_” was tried at the autumn term of the court, and caused
considerable excitement in the county; for, in addition to the amount
of property and the nice questions of law which were involved, the two
sides had been severally espoused by two sister churches, and nearly
half the county was in attendance, either as witnesses or interested
spectators. Not only was every available corner in the little village
filled to overflowing with parties, witnesses, and their adherents, but
during the first week of the term the stable yards and road-sides were
lined with covered wagons and other vehicles, in or under which some
of those who had not been fortunate enough to obtain shelter in the
inn used to sleep, and “Briles's bar” under the tavern did a thriving
business.

As the case, however, wore on, and the weather became inclement, the
crowd dropped off somewhat, though a sufficient number still remained to
give an air of life to the little roadside village.

Certain of these visitors found the bar-room on the ground floor of
the tavern across the road more attractive than the court-room, and as
evening came the loud talking in that direction told that the visits had
not been fruitless.

Perfect order, however, prevailed in the court, until one evening one
of these visitors, a young man named Turkle, who had been spending the
afternoon at the bar, made his way into the court-room. He was clad in
a dingy, weather-stained overcoat and an old slouch hat. He sank into
a seat at the end of a bench near the door and, being very drunk, soon
began to talk aloud to those about him.

“Silence!” called the Sheriff over the heads of the crowd from his desk
in front, and those near the man cautioned him to stop talking. A moment
later, however, he began again. Again the Sheriff roared “Silence!” But
by this time the hot air of the court-room had warmed up Mr. Turkle, and
in answer to the warning of those about him, he declared in a maudlin
tone, that he “Warn't goin' to keep silence.”

“I got 's much right to talk 's anyone, and I'ma goin' to talk 's much
's I please.”

His friends tried to silence him, and the Sheriff made his way through
the crowd and endeavored to induce him to leave the court-room. But it
was to no purpose. Jim Turkle was much too “far gone” to know what he
was doing, though he was in a delightfully good humor. He merely hugged
the Sheriff and laughed drunkenly.

“Aleck, you jist go 'way f'om here. I ain't a-goin' to shet up. You shet
up yourself. I 'm a-goin' to talk all I please. Now, you hear it.”

Then as if to atone for his rudeness, he caught the Sheriff roughly by
the arm and pulled him toward him:

“Aleck, how 's the case goin'? Is Mandy a goin' to win? Is that old
rascal rulin' right!”

The Sheriff urged something in a low voice, but Turkle would not be
silenced.

“Now you see thar,” he broke out with a laugh to those about him, “did
n't I tell you Aleck wa' n 't nothin' but a' ol' drunkard? What d'
you s'pose the ol' rascal wants me to do? He wants me to go over there
to the bar and git drunk like 'im, and I ain't goin' to do it. I never
drink. I 've come here to see that my cousin Mandy's chil'ern gits
their patrimony, and I ain' a goin' to 'sociate with these here drunken
fellows like Aleck Thompson.”

The Sheriff made a final effort. He spoke positively, but Turkle would
not heed.

“Oh, 'Judge' be damned! You and I know that ol' fellow loves a dram jest
's well 's the best of 'em--jest 's well 's you do. Look at his face.
You think he got that drinkin' well-water! Bet yer he 's got a bottle in
's pocket right now.”

A titter ran through the crowd, but was suddenly stopped.

A quiet voice was heard from the other end of the court-room, and a
deathly silence fell on the assemblage.

“Suspend for a moment, gentlemen, if you please. Mr. Sheriff, bring that
person to the bar of the Court.”

The crowd parted as if by magic, and the Sheriff led his drunken
constituent to the bar, where his befuddled brain took in just enough of
the situation to make him quiet enough. The Judge bent his sternest look
on him until he quailed.

“Have you no more sense of propriety than to disturb a court of justice
in the exercise of its high function?”

Turkle, however, was too drunk to understand this. He tried to steady
himself against the bar.

“I ain't is-turbed no Court of function, and anybody 't says so, Jedge,
iz a liar.” He dragged his hand across his mouth and tried to look
around upon the crowd with an air of drunken triumph, but he staggered
and would have fallen had not the Sheriff caught and supported him.

The Judge's eyes had never left him.

“Mr. Sheriff, take this intoxicated creature and confine him in the
county gaol until the expiration of the term. The very existence of a
court of justice depends upon the observance of order. Order must be
preserved and the dignity of the Court maintained.”

There was a stir--half of horror--throughout the court-room. Put a man
in that jail just for being tight!

Then the Sheriff on one side and his deputy on the other, led the
culprit out, now sufficiently quiet and half whimpering. A considerable
portion of the crowd followed him.

Outside, the prisoner was sober enough, and he begged hard to be let
off and allowed to go home. His friends, too, joined in his petition and
promised to guarantee that he would not come back again during the term
of court. But the Sheriff was firm.

“No. The Judge told me to put you in jail and I 'm goin' to do it.” He
took two huge iron keys from his deputy and rattled them fiercely.

Turkle shrank back with horror.

“You ain't goin' to put me in thar, Aleck! Not in that hole! Not just
for a little drop o' whiskey. It was _your_ whiskey, too, Aleck. I was
drinkin' yo' health, Aleck. You know I was.”

“The Judge won't know anything about it. He 'll never think of it
again,” pleaded several of Turkle's friends. “You know he has ordered a
drunken man put there before and never said any more about it--just told
you to discharge him next day.”

Turkle stiffened up with hope.

“Yes, Aleck.” He leaned on the Sheriff's arm heavily. “He 's drunk
himself--I don't mean that, I mean _you 're_ drunk--oh, no--I mean _I'm_
drunk. Everybody 's drunk.”

“Yes, you 've gone and called me a drunkard before the Court. Now I 'm
goin' to show you.” Thompson rattled his big keys again savagely.

Turkle caught him with both hands.

“Oh, Aleck, don't talk that a-way,” he pleaded in a tremulous voice.
“Don't talk that a-way!” He burst into tears and flung his arms around
the Sheriff's neck. He protested that he had never, seen him take a
drink in his life; he would go and tell the Judge so; if necessary, he
would swear to it on a Bible.

“Aleck, you know I love you better than anybody in this world--except my
wife and children. Yes, better than them--better than Jinny. Jinny will
tell you that herself. Oh! Aleck!” He clung to him and sobbed!

His friends indorsed this and declared that they would bring him back if
the Judge demanded his presence. They would “promise to bring him back
dead or alive at any time he sent for him.”

As Turkle and his friends were always warm supporters of the Sheriff, a
fact of which they did not fail to remind him, Thompson was not averse
to letting him off, especially as he felt tolerably sure that the Judge
would, as they said, forget all about the matter, or, if he remembered
it, would, as he had done before, simply order him to discharge the
prisoner. So, after dragging the culprit to the jail door to scare him
well and make his clemency the more impressive, he turned him over to
the others on condition that he would mount his mule and go straight
home and not come back again during the term. This Turkle was so glad to
do that he struck out at once for the stable at what Thompson called a
“turkey trot,” and five minutes later he was galloping down the road,
swinging mightily on his sorrel mule, but whipping for life.

That night Thompson was much toasted about the court-house for his
humanity. Several of his admirers, indeed, got into somewhat the same
condition that Turkle had been in.

Even Dick Creel, who had come to court that day, lapsed from virtue and
fell a victim to the general hilarity.




III

The next morning when court was opened, the Judge was even more than
usually dignified and formal. The customary routine of the morning
was gone through with; the orders of the day before were read and
were signed by the Judge with more than wonted solemnity. The Clerk, a
benignant-looking old man with a red face and a white beard, took up his
book and adjusted his glasses to call the pending docket: the case of
“_Dolittle vs. Dolittle's Ex'ex._,” and the array of counsel drew their
chairs up to the bar and prepared for the work of the day, when the
Judge, taking off his spectacles, turned to the Sheriff's desk.

“Mr. Sheriff, bring in that unfortunate inebriate whom I sentenced to
confinement in the gaol yesterday. The Court, while sensible of the
imperative necessity of protecting itself from all unseemly disorder and
preserving its dignity undiminished, nevertheless always leans to the
side of mercy. The Court trusts that a night's incarceration may have
sufficiently sobered and chastened the poor creature. The Court will
therefore give him a brief admonition and will then discharge him.”

The Judge sat back in his large arm-chair and waited benignantly with
his gaze resting placidly in front of him, while a deathly silence fell
on the crowd and every eye in the courthouse was turned on the Sheriff.

Thompson, standing at his desk, was staring at the Judge with jaw
dropped and a dazed look like a man who had suddenly to face judgment.
He opened his lips twice as if to speak, then turned and went slowly out
of the court-house like a man in a dream, while those left behind looked
in each other's eyes, some half scared and others more than half amused.

Outside, Thompson stopped just between two of the great pillars.
He rammed his hands deep in his pockets and gazed vacantly over the
court-green and up the road.

“What will he do with you! Remove you!” asked two or three friends who
had slipped out of the door behind him and now stood about him.

“He 'll put me in jail--_and_ remove me.”

*****

“No matter if he says black 's white and white 's black, don't you open
your mouth or you 'll get it. It 's much as I can do to keep you out of
jail this minute.”

“But, Sheriff--! But, Aleck--! Just wait a minute! I don't----”

The next instant he was inside the courthouse and the Sheriff was
marching him up the aisle between the upturned faces. He planted him at
the bar immediately before the Court, pulling off his hat in such a way
as to drag his hair over his face and give him an even more dishevelled
appearance than before. Then he moved around to his own desk, keeping
his eye fixed piercingly on the astonished Creel's bewildered face. A
gasp went over the court-room, and the Bar stared at the prisoner in
blank amazement.

The Judge alone appeared oblivious of his presence. He had sat
absolutely silent and motionless since he had given the order to the
Sheriff to produce the prisoner, his face expressive of deep reflection.
Now he withdrew his eye from the ceiling.

“Oh!”

With impressive deliberation he put on his large gold-rimmed spectacles;
sat up in his chair; assumed his most judicial expression, which sat
curiously on his benignant face, and looked severely down upon the
culprit. The court-room shivered and Thompson's round face grew
perceptibly whiter; but his eyes, after a single glance darted at the
Judge, never left the face of the man at the bar.

The next second the Judge began to speak, and Thompson, and the
court-room with him, heaved a deep sigh of relief.

“Young man,” said the Judge, “you have committed an act of grievous
impropriety. You have been guilty of one of the most reprehensible
offences that any citizen of a Commonwealth founded upon order and
justice could commit, an act of such flagrant culpability that the
Court, in the maintenance of its dignity and in the interest of the
Commonwealth found it necessary to visit upon you punishment of great
severity and incarcerate you in the gaol usually reserved for the most
depraved malefactors. Intemperance is one of the most debasing of
vices. It impairs the intellect and undermines the constitution. To
the inhibition of Holy Writ is added the cumulative if inferential
prohibition of the Law, which declines to consider inebriety, though
extreme enough in degree to impair if not destroy the reasoning faculty,
in mitigation of crime of the highest---- dignity. If you had no beloved
family to whom your conduct would be an affliction, yet you have a duty
to yourself and to the Commonwealth which you have flagrantly violated.
To shocking inebriety you added the even grosser misdemeanor of
disturbing a Court in the exercise of its supreme function: the calm,
orderly, and deliberate administration of justice between the citizens
of the Commonwealth.”

“But, Judge--?” began the young man.

A sharp cough from the Sheriff interrupted him and he glanced at the
Sheriff to meet a menacing shake of the head.

The strangeness of the scene and the impressive solemnity of the Judge
so wrought upon the young man that he began to whimper. He looked at the
Judge and once more opened his mouth to speak, but the Sheriff, called,
sharply:

“Silence!”

Creel glanced appealingly from the Judge to the Sheriff, only to meet
another imperative shake of the latter's head and a warning scowl. Then
the Judge proceeded, in a tone that showed that he was not insensible to
his altered manner.

“The Court, always mindful of that mercy whose quality 'is not strained,
but droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven upon the place beneath,'
trusts that your recent incarceration, though brief, may prove adequate
to the exigencies of the occasion. It hopes that the incarceration
of one night in the common gaol may prove in case of a young man like
yourself sufficiently efficacious to deter you from the repetition of
so grave a misdemeanor, and at the same time not crush too much that
generous spirit of youth which in its proper exercise may prove so
advantageous to its possessor, and redound so much to the benefit of
the Commonwealth. The order of the Court, therefore, is that the Sheriff
discharge you from further imprisonment.

“Mr. Sheriff, conduct the young man to the door, caution him against a
recurrence of his offence, and direct him toward his home.

“We will now proceed to call the docket.”

The court-room with another gasp broke into a buzz, which was instantly
quelled by the sharp command of the Sheriff for silence and order in the
court.

“But, Judge--” began Creel again, “I don't understand--”

What he did not understand was not heard, for Thompson seized the
prisoner before he could finish his sentence, and, with a grip of steel
on his arm, hustled him down the aisle and out of the court-room.

A good many persons poured out of the court-room after them and with
subdued laughter followed the Sheriff and his charge across the green.
Thompson, however, did not wait for them. The young man appeared
inclined to argue. But the Sheriff gave him no time. Hurrying him down
the walk, he unhitched his horse for him and ordered him to mount.

“But, Sheriff--Mr. Thompson, I 'm darned if I understand what it is all
about.”

“You were drunk,” said Thompson--“flagrantly inebriated. Go home. Did
n't you hear the Judge?”

“Yes, I heard him. He 's doty. I might have been drunk, but I 'm darned
if I slept in jail last night--I slept in----”

“I 'm darned if you did n't,” said the Sheriff. “The Judge has ruled
it so, and so you did. Now go home and don't you come back here again
during this term, or you will sleep in jail again.”

“That old Judge is doty,” declared the young man with a tone of
conviction.

“So much the worse for you if you come back here. Go home now, just as
quick as you can.”

Creel reflected for a moment.

“Well, it beats my time. I 'll tell you what I 'll do, Mr. Thompson,” he
said, half pleadingly. “I 'll go home and stay there if you will promise
not to tell my wife I was in jail.”

“I promise you,” said Aleck, solemnly. “I give you my word I won't.”

“And what 's more,” continued Creel, “if you 'll keep anybody else from
doing it, I 'll vote for you next time for Sheriff.”

“I promise you that, too,” said Aleck, “and if anybody says you were
there, let me know, and I 'll come up there and--and tell her you were
n't. I can't do any more than that, can I?”

“No, you can't do any more than that,” admitted Creel, sadly, and,
leaning over and shaking hands with the Sheriff cordially for the first
time in some years, he rode away in profound dejection.

“Well, I 've got to face Mary,” he said, “and I reckon I might as well
do it. Whiskey is a queer thing. I must have been a lot drunker than I
thought I was, because if the Court had n't ruled it, I would have sworn
I slept in that there wing room last night.”

“Well, that 's the best bluff I ever put up,” said Thompson to the
throng about him as he turned back to the court-house.

The Sheriff's bluff became the topic of the rest of the term. Such
audacity, such resourcefulness had never been known. Thompson became
more popular than ever, and his re-election the following spring was
admitted to be certain.

“That Aleck Thompson 's the smartest man that is,” declared one of his
delighted adherents.

Thompson himself thought so, too, and his imitation of the Judge, of
Dick Creel, and of himself in court became his most popular story.

Only the old Judge moved among the throng of tittering laymen calm,
dignified, and unsuspecting.

“If ever he gets hold of you, Aleck,” said one of that worthy's
worshippers, “there 's likely to be a vacancy in the office of sheriff.”

“He 'll put me in jail,” laughed Aleck. “Dick Creel says he 's kind o'
doty.”




IV

The Court was nearing the end of the term, _Dolittle et al. vs.
Dolittle's Executrix_, with all its witnesses and all its bitternesses,
had resulted in a mistrial, and the sister churches were wider apart
than ever. The rest of the docket was being daily disposed of.

The Sheriff was busy one day telling his story to an admiring throng on
the court-green when someone casually observed that Mrs. Dick Creel had
got off the train that morning.

The Sheriff's face changed a little.

“Where is she!”

“Waitin' in the tavern parlor.”

“What is she doing here! What is she doing in there!”

“Jest a settin' and a waitin'.”

“I 'spect she is waitin' for you, Aleck!” hazarded one of his friends.

There was a burst of laughter, for Squire Jefford's daughter, Mary, was
known to be “a woman of her own head.”

The Sheriff laughed, too; but his laughter was not as mirthful as usual.
He made an ineffectual attempt to keep up his jollity.

“I reckon I 'll go and see Mary,” he said at length.

He left the group with affected cheerfulness, but his heart was heavier
than he liked to admit. He made his way to the “ladies' parlor,” as
the little sitting-room in the south wing of the rambling old tavern,
overlooking the court-green was called, and opened the door.

On one side of the wood fire, in a stiff, high-backed chair sat a young
woman, in her hat and wrap and gloves, “jest a settin' and a waitin'.”
 She was a well-made and comely young woman under thirty, with a ruddy
face, smooth hair and bright eyes that the Sheriff knew could both smile
and snap. Her head was well set on rather plump shoulders; her mouth was
well formed, but was now close drawn, and her chin was strong enough to
show firmness--too much firmness, as Thompson mentally decided when he
caught its profile.

The Sheriff advanced with an amiable smile. He was so surprised.

“Why, you here, Mary! When did you come?” His tone was affable and even
testified pleasure. But Mary did not unbend. She was as stiff as the
chair she sat in. Without turning her head she turned her eyes and
looked at him sideways.

“_Mrs. Creel_.”

There was a glint in her black eyes that meant war, and Thompson's
countenance fell.

“Ah-ur-Mrs. Creel.”

“I did n't know as you 'd know me!” She spoke quietly, her eyes still on
him sidewise.

“Not know you! Why, of course, I know you. I don't forget the pretty
girls--leastways, the prettiest girl in the county. Your father and
I------”

“I heard you made a mistake about my husband and Jim Turkle. I thought
maybe you might think I was _Mrs_. Turkle.”

There was the least perceptible lifting of her shoulders and drawing
down of her mouth, but quite enough to suggest Jenny Turkle 's high
shoulders and grim face.

The Sheriff tried to lighten the conversation.

“Oh! Come now, Mary, you must n't get mad about that. It was all a joke.
I was comin' right up after court adjourned to tell you about it--and--.
It was the funniest thing! You 'd 'a' died laughing if you 'd been here
and seen----”

“I heard they was all laughin' about it. _I_ ain't so easy to amuse.”

“Oh! Yes, you would, too,” began Thompson, cajolingly. “If you 'd
seen----”

“What time does Court adjourn!” she asked, quietly and irrelevantly,

“Oh, not for two or three--not for _several_ days yet--Probably 't will
hold over till well into next week. But if you 'd seen----”

“I mean what time does it let out _to-day?_”

Thompson's face fell again.

“Why--ah--about--ah--Why! What do you want to know for!”

“I want to see the Judge.” Her voice was dead level.

“What about!”

“About business!”

“What business!”

“_Co'te_ business,” with cold irony.

“You don't mean that you 're goin' to----!”

He paused without framing the rest of the question.

She suddenly stood up and flamed out.

“Yes, I am--that 's just what I am goin' to do. That 's what I 've come
here for. You may take a liberty with the Judge--he 's doty; but you
can't take a liberty with _me_--I 'm Squire Jefford's daughter, and I 'm
goin' to show you.”

She was facing him now, and her black eyes were darting fire. Thompson
was quite staggered.

“Why, Mary! I am surprised at you. Your father's old friend--who has had
you on his knee many a time. I am shocked and surprised--and mortified
and--astonished--and mortified----”

“You 've done said that one once,” she said, icily.

“Why, Mary, I thought we were friends--” he began. But she cut in on
him.

“Friends!” She spoke with contempt. “You 've had it in for Dick ever
since he was a boy.” Her voice suddenly broke and the tears sprang to
her eyes and rolled down her cheeks.

“Why, Mary--no such thing--I assure you--Dick and I are the best of
friends--_dear_ friends.”

Her sniff was more forcible than words. She wiped her eyes and looked at
him with freezing contempt.

“I 'm a fool! And I don't want you to be _Mary_-in' me, either. If Dick
chooses to let you get him drunk and make a beast and a fool of him and
drag him up before the Court like a--a--like that drunkard, Jim Turkle,
what don't know how to behave himself seemly in Court, and Circuit Court
at that--he may; but I 'll let you know, _I'm_ not goin' to do it. I
don't mean the Judge to think my husband's a thing like that. I mean to
set him right. And I 'll tell him you are nothing but an old gambler who
spends your time ruinin' young men, and braggin' as how you can bluff
anybody.”

“Mary!--ur--Mrs. Creel!” gasped the Sheriff.

She stalked by him wiping her eyes, and marched straight to the door;
but the Sheriff was too quick for her. His office, his reputation,
everything hung on his pacifying her. He sprang to the door and,
standing with his back against it, began to apologize in so humble a
tone that even the angry wife could not but listen to him.

He said everything that any mortal could have said, and declared that he
would do anything on earth that she might ask.

She reflected, and he began to hope again. When their eyes met, hers
were still hard, but they were calmer.

“I know you think you are making a fool of me,” she began, and then as
he protested she shut him up with a sharp gesture.

“Yes, you do, you think so; but you are not. There is but one thing I
will accept in apology.”

“What is that!”

“You are to make Dick your deputy.”

“But, M----”

“I knew you would n't. Stand aside.” She gave a sweep of the arm.

“But, Mary!”

“Stand aside, I say--I 'd rather have you removed anyway.”

“But, Mary, just listen----”

“Stand aside, or I will call.” She straightened herself and looked past
him, as if listening.

“But, Mary, do be reasonable!”

She opened her mouth as if to cry out. The Sheriff threw up both hands.

“Mary, please--For kingdom's sake, don't! What unreasonable creatures
women are!”

“You 'd better let women alone. One is as much as you can manage now.”
 She spoke witheringly. “I give you one more chance.”

“More than I can manage. You know Dick will get drunk----”

“Not unless you make him. Who was drunk at that barbecue at Jones's
Cross Roads last summer!”

“Oh, Mary!”

“Who set up till after Sunday mornin' playin' kyards--. Yes, _gamblin'_
the last night of last County Cote!”

“Oh, Mary!--All right. I lay down my hand.”

She drew paper and pencil from her little bag and held them out to him.

“Write it down.”

“Ain't my word good enough!”

“If you mean to do it, why are you afraid to write it!”

“I 'm not afraid.”

“Then write it.” She held the paper to him with outstretched arm.

“What shall I write!”

“Write what I say: 'I Aleck Thompson, promise and bind myself if I
remain in office for another term to appoint my _dear_ friend, Dick
Creel'--underscore that--'my first deputy, and to keep him in as long as
he keeps sober and attends to his business.' Now sign it.”

“What consideration do I get for this!” Thompson looked up from the
paper at her ca-jolingly. She met his gaze with a little flash.

“Oh! I forgot the consideration,” she murmured, “and I Squire Jefford's
daughter, too!

“Write: 'The consideration for the above is the love I bear the
aforesaid Richard Creel, and the fear I have that his wife will tell the
Judge what a smart Aleck I am.'”

“Mary, you don't want me to write that!”

“Them very words. I little more forgot the consideration.”

The paper was written.

She glanced out of the window.

“Now I want a witness. I see the court is broken up.”

“Tain't necessary.”

“I want a witness, and I 'm goin' to _have_ him.”

“Who!”

“The Judge.”

“Look here, Mary----”

“I 'm goin' to have him. You come and introduce me.”

“Mary, are you after all goin' to----”

She met his gaze frankly.

“No--unless you go back on me. If you do, I 'll tell him and show him
the paper; and what 's more, I 'll show it all around this county.”

A flash of genuine admiration sprang into the Sheriff's eyes.

“Mary, you ought to have been a man, or--Mrs. Aleck Thompson.”

The paper was signed and witnessed.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Sheriffs Bluff, by Thomas Nelson Page

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHERIFFS BLUFF ***

***** This file should be named 23510-0.txt or 23510-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/5/1/23510/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
