The Project Gutenberg EBook of Marthe und ihre Uhr, by Theodor Storm

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Marthe und ihre Uhr
       Novelle

Author: Theodor Storm

Release Date: January 7, 2008 [EBook #24213]

Language: German

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARTHE UND IHRE UHR ***




Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Thorsten Kontowski and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                               Paetels

                           Taschenausgaben

                                 23

          __________________________________________________


                           Im Sonnenschein

                       Drei Sommergeschichten

                                 von

                            Theodor Storm


                         Dreizehnte Auflage




                     Verlag von Gebrüder Paetel

                               Berlin


          __________________________________________________


                  Druck von G. Kreysing in Leipzig

          __________________________________________________


                            Meiner Mutter

                                 zum

                    W e i h n a c h t a b e n d  1854


          __________________________________________________




                         MARTHE UND IHRE UHR.


Während der letzten Jahre meines Schulbesuchs wohnte ich in einem
kleinen Bürgerhause der Stadt, worin aber von Vater, Mutter und vielen
Geschwistern nur eine alternde, unverheiratete Tochter zurückgeblieben
war. Die Eltern und zwei Brüder waren gestorben, die Schwestern bis auf
die jüngste, die einen Arzt am selbigen Ort geheiratet hatte, ihren
Männern in entfernte Gegenden gefolgt. So blieb denn Marthe allein in
ihrem elterlichen Hause, worin sie sich durch das Vermieten des früheren
Familienzimmers und mit Hilfe einer kleinen Rente spärlich durchs Leben
brachte. Doch kümmerte es sie wenig, daß sie nur Sonntags ihren
Mittagstisch decken konnte; denn ihre Ansprüche an das äußere Leben
waren fast keine; eine Folge der strengen und sparsamen Erziehung, die
der Vater sowohl aus Grundsatz, als auch in Rücksicht seiner
beschränkten bürgerlichen Verhältnisse allen seinen Kindern gegeben
hatte. Wenn aber Marthen in ihrer Jugend nur die gewöhnliche
Schulbildung zuteil geworden war, so hatte das Nachdenken ihrer späteren
einsamen Stunden, vereinigt mit einem behenden Verstande und dem
sittlichen Ernst ihres Charakters, sie doch zu der Zeit, in der ich sie
kennen lernte, auf eine für Frauen, namentlich des Bürgerstandes,
ungewöhnlich hohe Bildungsstufe gehoben. Freilich sprach sie nicht immer
grammatisch richtig, obgleich sie viel und mit Aufmerksamkeit las, am
liebsten geschichtlichen oder poetischen Inhalts; aber sie wußte sich
dafür meistens über das Gelesene ein richtiges Urteil zu bilden und, was
so Wenigen gelingt, selbständig das Gute vom Schlechten zu
unterscheiden. Mörikes »Maler Nolten«, der damals erschien, machte
großen Eindruck auf sie, so daß sie ihn immer wieder las; erst das
Ganze, dann diese oder jene Partie, wie sie ihr eben zusagte. Die
Gestalten des Dichters wurden für sie selbstbestimmende lebende Wesen,
deren Handlungen nicht mehr an die Notwendigkeit des dichterischen
Organismus gebunden waren; und sie konnte stundenlang darüber
nachsinnen, auf welche Weise das hereinbrechende Verhängnis von so
vielen geliebten Menschen dennoch hätte abgewandt werden können.

Die Langeweile drückte Marthen in ihrer Einsamkeit nicht, wohl aber
zuweilen ein Gefühl der Zwecklosigkeit ihres Lebens nach außen hin; sie
bedurfte jemandes, für den sie hätte arbeiten und sorgen können. Bei dem
Mangel näher Befreundeter kam dieser löbliche Trieb ihren jeweiligen
Mietern zugute, und auch ich habe manche Freundlichkeit und
Aufmerksamkeit von ihrer Hand erfahren. — An Blumen hatte sie eine
große Freude, und es schien mir ein Zeichen ihres anspruchslosen und
resignierten Sinnes, daß sie unter ihnen die weißen und von diesen
wieder die einfachen am liebsten hatte. Es war immer ihr erster Festtag
im Jahre, wenn ihr die Kinder der Schwester aus deren Garten die ersten
Schneeglöckchen und Märzblumen brachten; dann wurde ein kleines
Porzellankörbchen aus dem Schranke herabgenommen; und die Blumen zierten
unter ihrer sorgsamen Pflege wochenlang die kleine Kammer.

Da Marthe seit dem Tode ihrer Eltern wenig Menschen um sich sah und
namentlich die langen Winterabende fast immer allein zubrachte, so lieh
die regsame und gestaltende Phantasie, die ihr ganz besonders eigen war,
den Dingen um sie her eine Art von Leben und Bewußtsein. Sie borgte
Teilchen ihrer Seele aus an die alten Möbel ihrer Kammer, und die alten
Möbel erhielten so die Fähigkeit, sich mit ihr zu unterhalten; meistens
freilich war diese Unterhaltung eine stumme, aber sie war dafür desto
inniger und ohne Mißverständnis. Ihr Spinnrad, ihr braungeschnitzter
Lehnstuhl waren gar sonderbare Dinge, die oft die eigentümlichsten
Grillen hatten; vorzüglich war dies aber der Fall mit einer altmodischen
Stutzuhr, die ihr verstorbener Vater vor über fünfzig Jahren, auch
damals schon als ein uraltes Stück, auf dem Trödelmarkt zu Amsterdam
gekauft hatte. Das Ding sah freilich seltsam genug aus: zwei Meerweiber,
aus Blech geschnitten und dann übermalt, lehnten zu jeder Seite ihr
langhaariges Antlitz an das vergilbte Zifferblatt; die schuppigen
Fischleiber, die von einstiger Vergoldung zeugten, umschlossen dasselbe
nach unten zu; die Weiser schienen dem Schwanze eines Skorpions
nachgebildet zu sein. Vermutlich war das Räderwerk durch langen Gebrauch
verschlissen; denn der Perpendikelschlag war hart und ungleich, und die
Gewichte schossen zuweilen mehrere Zoll mit einemmal hinunter. — Diese
Uhr war die beredteste Gesellschaft ihrer Besitzerin; sie mischte sich
aber auch in alle ihre Gedanken. Wenn Marthe in ein Hinbrüten über ihre
Einsamkeit verfallen wollte, dann ging der Perpendikel tick, tack! tick,
tack! immer härter, immer eindringlicher; er ließ ihr keine Ruh, er
schlug immer mitten in ihre Gedanken hinein. Endlich mußte sie aufsehen;
— da schien die Sonne so warm in die Fensterscheiben, die Nelken auf
dem Fensterbrett dufteten so süß; draußen schossen die Schwalben singend
durch den Himmel. Sie mußte wieder fröhlich sein, die Welt um sie her
war gar zu freundlich.

Die Uhr hatte aber auch wirklich ihren eigenen Kopf; sie war alt
geworden und kehrte sich nicht mehr so gar viel an die neue Zeit; daher
schlug sie oft sechs, wenn sie zwölf schlagen sollte, und ein andermal,
um es wieder gut zu machen, wollte sie nicht aufhören zu schlagen, bis
Marthe das Schlaglot von der Kette nahm. Das Wunderlichste war, daß sie
zuweilen gar nicht dazu kommen konnte; dann schnurrte und schnurrte es
zwischen den Rädern, aber der Hammer wollte nicht ausholen; und das
geschah meistens mitten in der Nacht. Marthe wurde jedesmal wach; und
mochte es im klingendsten Winter und in der dunkelsten Nacht sein, sie
stand auf und ruhte nicht, bis sie die alte Uhr aus ihren Nöten erlöst
hatte. Dann ging sie wieder zu Bette und dachte sich allerlei, warum die
Uhr sie wohl geweckt habe, und fragte sich, ob sie in ihrem Tagewerk
auch etwas vergessen, ob sie es auch mit guten Gedanken beschlossen
habe.

Nun war es Weihnachten. Den Christabend, da ein übermäßiger Schneefall
mir den Weg zur Heimat versperrte, hatte ich in einer befreundeten,
kinderreichen Familie zugebracht; der Tannenbaum hatte gebrannt, die
Kinder waren jubelnd in die langverschlossene Weihnachtsstube gestürzt;
nachher hatten wir die unerläßlichen Karpfen gegessen und Bischof dazu
getrunken; nichts von der herkömmlichen Feierlichkeit war versäumt
worden. — Am andern Morgen trat ich zu Marthe in die Kammer, um ihr den
gebräuchlichen Glückwunsch zum Feste abzustatten. Sie saß mit
untergestütztem Arm am Tische; ihre Arbeit schien längst geruht zu
haben.

»Und wie haben Sie denn gestern Ihren Weihnachtabend zugebracht?« fragte
ich.

Sie sah zu Boden und antwortete: »Zu Hause.«

»Zu Hause? Und nicht bei Ihren Schwesterkindern?«

»Ach,« sagte sie, »seit meine Mutter gestern vor zehn Jahren hier in
diesem Bette starb, bin ich am Weihnachtabend nicht ausgegangen. Meine
Schwester schickte gestern wohl zu mir, und als es dunkel wurde, dachte
ich wohl daran, einmal hinzugehen; aber — die alte Uhr war auch wieder
so drollig; es war akkurat, als wenn sie immer sagte: ›Tu es nicht, tu
es nicht! Was willst du da? Deine Weihnachtsfeier gehört ja nicht
dahin!‹«

Und so blieb sie denn zu Haus in dem kleinen Zimmer, wo sie als Kind
gespielt, wo sie später ihren Eltern die Augen zugedrückt hatte, und wo
die alte Uhr pickte ganz wie dazumalen. Aber jetzt, nachdem sie ihren
Willen bekommen und Marthe das schon hervorgezogene Festkleid wieder in
den Schrank verschlossen hatte, pickte sie so leise, ganz leise und
immer leiser, zuletzt unhörbar. — Marthe durfte sich ungestört der
Erinnerung aller Weihnachtabende ihres Lebens überlassen: Ihr Vater saß
wieder in dem braungeschnitzten Lehnstuhl; er trug das feine
Sammetkäppchen und den schwarzen Sonntagsrock; auch blickten seine
ernsten Augen heute so freundlich; denn es war Weihnachtabend,
Weihnachtabend vor — ach, vor sehr, sehr vielen Jahren! Ein
Weihnachtbaum zwar brannte nicht auf dem Tisch — das war ja nur für
reiche Leute —; aber statt dessen zwei hohe dicke Lichter; und davon
wurde das kleine Zimmer so hell, daß die Kinder ordentlich die Hand vor
die Augen halten mußten, als sie aus der dunklen Vordiele hineintreten
durften. Dann gingen sie an den Tisch, aber nach der Weise des Hauses
ohne Hast und laute Freudenäußerung, und betrachteten, was ihnen das
Christkind einbeschert hatte. Das waren nun freilich keine teuern
Spielsachen, auch nicht einmal wohlfeile, sondern lauter nützliche und
notwendige Dinge, ein Kleid, ein Paar Schuhe, eine Rechentafel, ein
Gesangbuch und dergleichen mehr; aber die Kinder waren gleichwohl
glücklich mit ihrer Rechentafel und ihrem neuen Gesangbuch, und sie
gingen eins ums andre, dem Vater die Hand zu küssen, der währenddessen
zufrieden lächelnd in seinem Lehnstuhl geblieben war. Die Mutter mit
ihrem milden, freundlichen Gesicht unter dem enganliegenden Scheiteltuch
band ihnen die neue Schürze vor und malte ihnen Zahlen und Buchstaben
zum Nachschreiben auf die neue Tafel. Doch sie hatte nicht gar lange
Zeit, sie mußte in die Küche und Apfelkuchen backen, denn das war für
die Kinder eine Hauptbescherung am Weihnachtabend; die mußten notwendig
gebacken werden. Da schlug der Vater das neue Gesangbuch auf und stimmte
mit seiner klaren Stimme an: Frohlockt, lobsinget Gott; die Kinder aber,
die alle Melodien kannten, stimmten ein: der Heiland ist gekommen; und
so sangen sie den Gesang zu Ende, indem sie alle um des Vaters Lehnstuhl
herumstanden. Nur in den Pausen hörte man in der Küche das Hantieren der
Mutter und das Prasseln der Apfelkuchen. — —

Tick, tack! ging es wieder; tick, tack! immer härter und eindringlicher,
Marthe fuhr empor; da war es fast dunkel um sie her, draußen auf dem
Schnee nur lag trüber Mondschein. Außer dem Pendelschlag der Uhr war es
totenstill im Hause. Keine Kinder sangen in der kleinen Stube, kein
Feuer prasselte in der Küche. Sie war ja ganz allein zurückgeblieben;
die andern waren alle, alle fort. — Aber was wollte die alte Uhr denn
wieder? — Ja, da warnte es auf elf — und ein andrer Weihnachtabend
tauchte in Marthens Erinnerung auf, ach! ein ganz andrer; viele, viele
Jahre später. Der Vater und die Brüder waren tot, die Schwestern
verheiratet; die Mutter, die nun mit Marthen allein geblieben war, hatte
schon längst des Vaters Platz im braunen Lehnstuhl eingenommen und
ihrer Tochter die kleinen Wirtschaftssorgen übertragen; denn sie
kränkelte seit des Vaters Tode, ihr mildes Antlitz wurde immer blässer,
und ihre freundlichen Augen blickten immer matter; endlich mußte sie
auch den Tag über im Bette bleiben. Das war schon über drei Wochen, und
nun war es Weihnachtabend. Marthe saß an ihrem Bett und horchte auf den
Atem der Schlummernden; es war totenstill in der Kammer, nur die Uhr
pickte. Da warnte es auf elf, die Mutter schlug die Augen auf und
verlangte zu trinken. »Marthe,« sagte sie, »wenn es erst Frühling wird,
und ich wieder zu Kräften gekommen bin, dann wollen wir deine Schwester
Hanne besuchen; ich habe ihre Kinder eben im Traume gesehen; — du hast
hier gar zu wenig Vergnügen.« — Die Mutter hatte ganz vergessen, daß
Schwester Hannes Kinder im Spätherbst gestorben waren; Marthe erinnerte
sie auch nicht daran, sie nickte schweigend mit dem Kopf und faßte ihre
abgefallenen Hände. Die Uhr schlug elf. —

Auch jetzt schlug sie elf, aber leise, wie aus weiter, weiter Ferne. —

Da hörte Marthe einen tiefen Atemzug; sie dachte, die Mutter wolle
wieder schlafen. So blieb sie sitzen, lautlos, regungslos, die Hand der
Mutter noch immer in der ihren; am Ende verfiel sie in einen
schlummerähnlichen Zustand. Es mochte so eine Stunde vergangen sein; da
schlug die Uhr zwölf! — Das Licht war ausgebrannt, der Mond schien hell
ins Fenster; aus den Kissen sah das bleiche Gesicht der Mutter. Marthe
hielt eine kalte Hand in der ihrigen. Sie ließ diese kalte Hand nicht
los, sie saß die ganze Nacht bei der toten Mutter. —

So saß sie jetzt bei ihren Erinnerungen in derselben Kammer, und die
alte Uhr pickte bald laut, bald leise; sie wußte von allem, sie hatte
alles mit erlebt, sie erinnerte Marthe an alles, an ihre Leiden, an ihre
kleinen Freuden. —

Ob es noch so gesellig in Marthens einsamer Kammer ist? Ich weiß es
nicht; es sind viele Jahre her, seit ich in ihrem Hause wohnte, und jene
kleine Stadt liegt weit von meiner Heimat. — Was Menschen, die das
Leben lieben, nicht auszusprechen wagen, pflegte sie laut und ohne Scheu
zu äußern: Ich bin niemals krank gewesen; ich werde gewiß sehr alt
werden. — Ist ihr Glaube ein richtiger gewesen und sollten diese
Blätter den Weg in ihre Kammer finden, so möge sie sich beim Lesen auch
meiner erinnern. Die alte Uhr wird helfen; sie weiß ja von allem
Bescheid.




[Anmerkungen zur Transkription:

 Das Buch »Im Sonnenschein« enthält vier Novellen von Theodor Storm:

 - Im Sonnenschein
 - Marthe und ihre Uhr
 - Im Saal
 - Im Brauerhause

 Das vorliegende elektronische Buch gibt nur die Novelle »Marthe und ihre
 Uhr« wieder.

 Gegenüber der gedruckten Version wurden folgende Satzfehler korrigiert:

 original: oder poetischen Inhalts:
 ebook:    oder poetischen Inhalts;

 original: bin ich am Weihnachtsabend
 ebook:    bin ich am Weihnachtabend

 original: »seit ... sagte: »Tu ... nicht dahin!«
 ebook:    »seit ... sagte: ›Tu ... nicht dahin!‹«

 original: wie aus weiter weiter Ferne
 ebook:    wie aus weiter, weiter Ferne

 original: sie erinnerte Martha an alles
 ebook:    sie erinnerte Marthe an alles

 Das Originalbuch ist in Frakturschrift gedruckt.]

[Transcriber's Note:

 This ebook includes only the novella »Marthe und ihre Uhr«. It was
 published in the book »Im Sonnenschein« which includes four novellas
 by Theodor Storm:

 - Im Sonnenschein
 - Marthe und ihre Uhr
 - Im Saal
 - Im Brauerhause

 The following corrections were applied to the original text:

 original: oder poetischen Inhalts:
 ebook:    oder poetischen Inhalts;

 original: bin ich am Weihnachtsabend
 ebook:    bin ich am Weihnachtabend

 original: »seit ... sagte: »Tu ... nicht dahin!«
 ebook:    »seit ... sagte: ›Tu ... nicht dahin!‹«

 original: wie aus weiter weiter Ferne
 ebook:    wie aus weiter, weiter Ferne

 original: sie erinnerte Martha an alles
 ebook:    sie erinnerte Marthe an alles

 The original book is printed in fraktur.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Marthe und ihre Uhr, by Theodor Storm

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARTHE UND IHRE UHR ***

***** This file should be named 24213-0.txt or 24213-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/2/1/24213/

Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Thorsten Kontowski and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
