The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story Of Gunnlaug The Worm-Tongue And
Raven The Skald, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story Of Gunnlaug The Worm-Tongue And Raven The Skald
       1875

Author: Anonymous

Translator: Eirikr Magnusson And William Morris

Release Date: January 25, 2008 [EBook #24421]
Last Updated: October 8, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORY OF GUNNLAUG ***




Produced by David Widger





THE STORY OF GUNNLAUG THE WORM-TONGUE AND RAVEN THE SKALD.

Translated From The  Icelandic By Eirikr Magnusson And William Morris

1875

[Transcriber’s Note: Thought to be written in the 13th Century]

_EVEN AS ARI THORGILSON THE LEARNED, THE PRIEST, HATH TOLD IT, WHO WAS
THE MAN OF ALL ICELAND MOST LEARNED IN TALES OF THE LAND’S INHABITING
AND IN LORE OF TIME AGONE_.




CHAPTER I.     Of Thorstein Egilson and his Kin.

There was a man called Thorstein, the son of Egil, the son of
Skallagrim, the son of Kveldulf the Hersir of Norway. Asgerd was the
mother of Thorstein; she was the daughter of Biorn Hold. Thorstein dwelt
at Burg in Burg-firth; he was rich of fee, and a great chief, a wise
man, meek and of measure in all wise. He was nought of such wondrous
growth and strength as his father Egil had been; yet was he a right
mighty man, and much beloved of all folk.

Thorstein was goodly to look on, flaxen-haired, and the best-eyed of
men; and so say men of lore that many of the kin of the Mere-men, who
are come of Egil, have been the goodliest folk; yet, for all that, this
kindred have differed much herein, for it is said that some of them have
been accounted the most ill-favoured of men: but in that kin have been
also many men of great prowess in many wise, such as Kiartan, the son of
Olaf Peacock, and Slaying-Bardi, and Skuli, the son of Thorstein. Some
have been great bards, too, in that kin, as Biorn, the champion of
Hit-dale, priest Einar Skulison, Snorri Sturluson, and many others.

Now, Thorstein had to wife Jofrid, the daughter of Gunnar, the son of
Hlifar. This Gunnar was the best skilled in weapons, and the lithest of
limb of all bonderfolk who have been in Iceland; the second was Gunnar
of Lithend; but Steinthor of Ere was the third. Jofrid was eighteen
winters old when Thorstein wedded her; she was a widow, for Thorodd,
son of Odd of Tongue, had had her to wife aforetime. Their daughter was
Hungerd, who was brought up at Thorstein’s at Burg. Jofrid was a very
stirring woman; she and Thorstein had many children betwixt them, but
few of them come into this tale. Skuli was the eldest of their sons,
Kollsvein the second, Egil the third.




CHAPTER II.     Of Thorsteins Dream.

One summer, it is said, a ship came from over the main into Gufaros.
Bergfinn was he hight who was the master thereof, a Northman of kin,
rich in goods, and somewhat stricken in years, and a wise man he was
withal.

Now, goodman Thorstein rode to the ship, as it was his wont mostly
to rule the market, and this he did now. The Eastmen got housed, but
Thorstein took the master to himself, for thither he prayed to go.
Bergfinn was of few words throughout the winter, but Thorstein treated
him well The Eastman had great joy of dreams.

One day in spring-tide Thorstein asked Bergfinn if he would ride with
him up to Hawkfell, where at that time was the Thing-stead of the
Burg-firthers; for Thorstein had been told that the walls of his booth
had fallen in. The Eastman said he had good will to go, so that day they
rode, some three together, from home, and the house-carles of Thorstein
withal, till they came up under Hawkfell to a farmstead called Foxholes.
There dwelt a man of small wealth called Atli, who was Thorstein’s
tenant Thorstein bade him come and work with them, and bring with him
hoe and spade. This he did, and when they came to the tofts of the
booth, they set to work all of them, and did out the walls.

The weather was hot with sunshine that day, and Thorstein and the
Eastman grew heavy; and when they had moved out the walls, those two sat
down within the tofts, and Thorstein slept, and fared ill in his sleep.
The Eastman sat beside him, and let him have his dream fully out, and
when he awoke he was much wearied. Then the Eastman asked him what he
had dreamt, as he had had such an ill time of it in his sleep.

Thorstein said, “Nay, dreams betoken nought.”

But as they rode homeward in the evening, the Eastman asked him again
what he had dreamt.

Thorstein said, “If I tell thee the dream, then shalt thou unriddle it
to me, as it verily is.”

The Eastman said he would risk it.

Then Thorstein said: “This was my dream; for methought I was at home
at Burg, standing outside the men’s-door, and I looked up at the
house-roof, and on the ridge I saw a swan, goodly and fair, and I
thought it was mine own, and deemed it good beyond all things. Then I
saw a great eagle sweep down from the mountains, and fly thitherward and
alight beside the swan, and chuckle over her lovingly; and methouht
the swan seemed well content thereat; but I noted that the eagle was
black-eyed, and that on him were iron claws: valiant he seemed to me.

“After this I thought I saw another fowl come flying from the south
quarter, and he, too, came hither to Burg, and sat down on the house
beside the swan, and would fain be fond with her. This also was a mighty
eagle.

“But soon I thought that the eagle first-come ruffled up at the coming
of the other. Then they fought fiercely and long, and this I saw that
both bled, and such was the end of their play, that each tumbled either
way down from the house-roof, and there they lay both dead.

“But the swan sat left alone, drooping much, and sad of semblance.

“Then I saw a fowl fly from the west; that was a falcon, and he sat
beside the swan and made fondly towards her, and they flew away both
together into one and the same quarter, and therewith I awoke.

“But a dream of no mark this is,” he says, “and will in all likelihood
betoken gales, that they shall meet in the air from those quarters
whence I deemed the fowl flew.”

The Eastman spake: “I deem it nowise such,” saith he.

Thorstein said, “Make of the dream, then, what seemeth likest to thee,
and let me hear.”

Then said the Eastman: “These birds are like to be fetches of men: but
thy wife sickens now, and she will give birth to a woman-child fair and
lovely; and dearly thou wilt love her; but high-born men shall woo thy
daughter, coming from such quarters as the eagles seemed to fly from,
and shall love her with overweening love, and shall fight about her,
and both lose their lives thereby. And thereafter a third man, from the
quarter whence came the falcon, shall woo her, and to that man shall
she be wedded. Now, I have unravelled thy dream, and I think things will
befall as I have said.”

Thorstein answered: “In evil and unfriendly wise is the dream
interpreted, nor do I deem thee fit for the work of unriddling dreams.”

Then Eastman said, “Thou shalt find how it will come to pass.”

But Thorstein estranged himself from the Eastman thenceforward, and he
left that summer, and now he is out of the tale.




CHAPTER III.     Of the Birth and Fostering of Helga the Fair.

This summer Thorstein got ready to ride to the Thing, and spake to
Jofrid his wife before he went from home. “So is it,” he says, “that
thou art with child now, but thy child shall be cast forth if thou bear
a woman; but nourished if it be a man.”

Now, at this time when all the land was heathen, it was somewhat the
wont of such men as had little wealth, and were like to have many young
children on their hands, to have them cast forth, but an evil deed it
was always deemed to be.

And now, when Thorstein had said this, Jofrid answers, “This is a word
all unlike thee, such a man as thou art, and surely to a wealthy man
like thee it will not seem good that this should be done.”

Thorstein answered: “Thou knowest my mind, and that no good will hap if
my will be thwarted.”

So he rode to the Thing; but while he was gone Jofrid gave birth to a
woman-child wondrous fair. The women would fain show her to the mother;
she said there was little need thereof, but had her shepherd Thorvard
called to her, and spake to him:--

“Thou shalt take my horse and saddle it, and bring this child west
to Herdholt, to Thorgerd, Egil’s daughter, and pray her to nourish it
secretly, so that Thorstein may not know thereof. For with such looks of
love do I behold this child, that surely I cannot bear to have it cast
forth. Here are three marks of silver, have them in reward of thy work;
but west there Thorgerd will get thee fare and food over the sea.”

Then Thorvard did her bidding; he rode with the child to Herdholt, and
gave it into Thorgerd’s hands, and she had it nourished at a tenant’s of
hers who dwelt at Freedmans-stead up in Hvamfirth; but she got fare for
Thorvard north in Steingrims-firth, in Shell-creek, and gave him meet
outfit for his sea-faring: he went thence abroad, and is now out of the
story.

Now when Thorstein came home from the Thing, Jofrid told him that the
child had been cast forth according to his word, but that the herdsman
had fled away and stolen her horse. Thorstein said she had done well,
and got himself another herdsman. So six winters passed, and this matter
was nowise wotted of.

Now in those days Thorstein rode to Herdholt, being bidden there as
guest of his brother-in-law, Olaf Peacock, the son of Hoskuld, who was
then deemed to be the chief highest of worth among all men west there.
Good cheer was made Thorstein, as was like to be; and one day at the
feast it is said that Thorgerd sat in the high seat talking with her
brother Thorstein, while Olaf was talking to other men; but on the bench
right over against them sat three little maidens. Then said Thorgerd,--

“How dost thou, brother, like the look of these three little maidens
sitting straight before us?”

“Right well,” he answers, “but one is by far the fairest; she has all
the goodliness of Olaf, but the whiteness and the countenance of us, the
Mere-men.”

Thorgerd answered: “Surely this is true, brother, wherein thou sayest
that she has the fairness and countenance of us Mere-folk, but
the goodliness of Olaf Peacock she has not got, for she is not his
daughter.”

“How can that be,” says Thorstein, “being thy daughter none the less?”

She answered: “To say sooth, kinsman,” quoth she, “this fair maiden is
not my daughter, but thine.”

And therewith she told him all as it had befallen, and prayed him to
forgive her and his own wife that trespass.

Thorstein said: “I cannot blame you two for having done this; most
things will fall as they are fated, and well have ye covered over my
folly: so look I on this maiden that I deem it great good luck to have
so fair a child. But now, what is her name?”

“Helga she is called,” says Thorgerd.

“Helga the Fair,” says Thorstein. “But now shalt thou make her ready to
come home with me.”

She did so, and Thorstein was led out with good gifts, and Helga rode
with him to his home, and was brought up there with much honour and
great love from father and mother and all her kin.




CHAPTER IV.     Of Gunnlaug Worm-tongue and his Kin.

Now at this time there dwelt at Gilsbank, up in White-water-side, Illugi
the Black, son of Hallkel, the son of Hrosskel. The mother of Illugi was
Thurid Dandle, daughter of Gunnlaug Worm-tongue.

Illugi was the next greatest chief in Burg-firth after Thorstein
Egilson. He was a man of broad lands and hardy of mood, and wont to do
well to his friends; he had to wife Ingibiorg, the daughter of Asbiorn
Hordson, from Ornolfsdale; the mother of Ingibiorg was Thorgerd, the
daughter of Midfirth-Skeggi. The children of Illugi and Ingibiorg were
many, but few of them have to do with this story. Hermund was one of
their sons, and Gunnlaug another; both were hopeful men, and at this
time of ripe growth.

It is told of Gunnlaug that he was quick of growth in his early youth,
big, and strong; his hair was light red, and very goodly of fashion; he
was dark-eyed, somewhat ugly-nosed, yet of lovesome countenance; thin
of flank he was, and broad of shoulder, and the best-wrought of men; his
whole mind was very masterful; eager was he from his youth up, and in
all wise unsparing and hardy; he was a great skald, but somewhat bitter
in his rhyming, and therefore was he called Gunnlaug Worm-tongue.

Hermund was the best beloved of the two brothers, and had the mien of a
great man.

When Gunnlaug was fifteen winters old he prayed his father for goods to
fare abroad withal, and said he had will to travel and see the manners
of other folk. Master Illugi was slow to take the matter up, and said he
was unlike to be deemed good in the out-lands “when I can scarcely shape
thee to my own liking at home.”

On a morning but a very little afterwards it happened that Illugi came
out early, and saw that his storehouse was opened, and that some
sacks of wares, six of them, had been brought out into the road, and
therewithal too some pack-gear. Now, as he wondered at this, there came
up a man leading four horses, and who should it be but his son Gunnlaug.
Then said he:--

“I it was who brought out the sacks.”

Illugi asked him why he had done so. He said that they should make his
faring goods.

Illugi said: “In nowise shalt thou thwart my will, nor fare anywhere
sooner than I like!” and in again he swung the ware-sacks therewith.

Then Gunnlaug rode thence and came in the evening down to Burg, and
goodman Thorstein asked him to bide there, and Gunnlaug was fain of
that proffer. He told Thorstein how things had gone betwixt him and his
father, and Thorstein offered to let him bide there as long as he liked,
and for some seasons Gunnlaug abode there, and learned law-craft of
Thorstein, and all men accounted well of him.

Now Gunnlaug and Helga would be always at the chess-playing together,
and very soon each found favour with the other, as came to be proven
well enough afterwards: they were very nigh of an age.

Helga was so fair, that men of lore say that she was the fairest woman
of Iceland, then or since; her hair was so plenteous and long that it
could cover her all over, and it was as fair as a band of gold; nor was
there any so good to choose as Helga the Fair in all Burgfirth, and far
and wide elsewhere.

Now one day, as men sat in the hall at Burg, Gunnlaug spake to
Thorstein: “One thing in law there is which thou hast not taught me, and
that is how to woo me a wife.”

Thorstein said, “That is but a small matter,” and therewith taught him
how to go about it.

Then said Gunnlaug, “Now shalt thou try if I have understood all: I
shall take thee by the hand and make as if I were wooing thy daughter
Helga.”

“I see no need of that,” says Thorstein. Gunnlaug, however, groped
then and there after his hand, and seizing it said, “Nay, grant me this
though.”

“Do as thou wilt, then,” said Thorstein; “but be it known to all who
are hereby that this shall be as if it had been unspoken, nor shall any
guile follow herein.”

Then Gunnlaug named for himself witnesses, and betrothed Helga to him,
and asked thereafter if it would stand good thus. Thorstein said that it
was well; and those who were present were mightily pleased at all this.




CHAPTER V.     Of Raven and his Kin.

There was a man called Onund, who dwelt in the south at Mossfell: he
was the wealthiest of men, and had a priesthood south there about the
nesses. He was married, and his wife was called Geirny. She was the
daughter of Gnup, son of Mold-Gnup, who settled at Grindwick, in the
south country. Their sons were Raven, and Thorarin, and Eindridi; they
were all hopeful men, but Raven was in all wise the first of them. He
was a big man and a strong, the sightliest of men and a good skald;
and when he was fully grown he fared between sundry lands, and was well
accounted of wherever he came.

Thorod the Sage, the son of Eyvind, then dwelt at Hjalli, south in
Olfus, with Skapti his son, who was then the spokesman-at-law in
Iceland. The mother of Skapti was Ranveig, daughter of Gnup, the son of
Mold-Gnup; and Skapti and the sons of Onund were sisters’ sons. Between
these kinsmen was much friendship as well as kinship.

At this time Thorfin, the son of Selthorir, dwelt at Red-Mel, and
had seven sons, who were all the hopefullest of men; and of them were
these--Thorgils, Eyjolf, and Thorir; and they were all the greatest men
out there. But these men who have now been named lived all at one and
the same time.

Next to this befell those tidings, the best that ever have befallen here
in Iceland, that the whole land became Christian, and that all folk cast
off the old faith.




CHAPTER VI. How Helga was vowed to Gunnlaug, and of Gunnlaug’s
faring abroad.

Gunnlaug Worm-Tongue was, as is aforesaid, whiles at Burg with
Thorstein, whiles with his father Illugi at Gilsbank, three winters
together, and was by now eighteen winters old; and father and son were
now much more of a mind.

There was a man called Thorkel the Black; he was a house-carle of
Illugi, and near akin to him, and had been brought up in his house. To
him fell an heritage north at As, in Water-dale, and he prayed Gunnlaug
to go with him thither. This he did, and so they rode, the two together,
to As. There they got the fee; it was given up to them by those who had
the keeping of it, mostly because of Gunnlaug’s furtherance.

But as they rode from the north they guested at Grimstongue, at a rich
bonder’s who dwelt there; but in the morning a herdsman took Gunnlaug’s
horse, and it had sweated much by then he got it back. Then Gunnlaug
smote the herdsman, and stunned him; but the bonder would in nowise bear
this, and claimed boot therefor. Gunnlaug offered to pay him one mark.
The bonder thought it too little.

Then Gunnlaug sang,--

          “Bade I the middling mighty
          To have a mark of waves’ flame;
          Giver of grey seas? glitter,
          This gift shalt thou make shift with.
          If the elf sun of the waters
          From out of purse thou lettest,
          O waster of the worm’s bedy
          Awaits thee sorrow later.”

So the peace was made as Gunnlaug bade, and in such wise the two rode
south.

Now, a little while after, Gunnlaug asked his father a second time for
goods for going abroad.

Illugi says, “Now shalt thou have thy will, for thou hast wrought
thyself into something better than thou wert.” So Illugi rode hastily
from home, and bought for Gunnlaug half a ship which lay in Gufaros,
from Audun Festargram--this Audun was he who would not flit abroad the
sons of Oswif the Wise, after the slaying of Kiartan Olafson, as is
told in the story of the Laxdalemen, which thing though betid later than
this.--And when Illugi came home, Gunnlaug thanked him well.

Thorkel the Black betook himself to seafaring with Gunnlaug, and their
wares were brought to the ship; but Gunnlaug was at Burg while they made
her ready, and found more cheer in talk with Helga than in toiling with
chapmen.

Now one day Thorstein asked Gunnlaug if he would ride to his horses with
him up to Long-water-dale. Gunnlaug said he would. So they ride both
together till they come to the mountain-dairies of Thorstein, called
Thorgils-stead. There were stud-horses of Thorstein, four of them
together, all red of hue. There was one horse very goodly, but little
tried: this horse Thorstein offered to give to Gunnlaug. He said he was
in no need of horses, as he was going away from the country; and so they
ride to other stud-horses. There was a grey horse with four mares, and
he was the best of horses in Burgfirth. This one, too, Thorstein offered
to give Gunnlaug, but he said, “I desire these in no wise more than the
others; but why dost thou not bid me what I will take?”

“What is that?” said Thorstein.

“Helga the Fair, thy daughter,” says Gunnlaug.

“That rede is not to be settled so hastily,” said Thorstein; and
therewithal got on other talk. And now they ride homewards down along
Long-water.

Then said Gunnlaug, “I must needs know what thou wilt answer me about
the wooing.”

Thorstein answers: “I heed not thy vain talk,” says he.

Gunnlaug says, “This is my whole mind, and no vain words.”

Thorstein says, “Thou shouldst first know thine own will. Art thou not
bound to fare abroad? and yet thou makest as if thou wouldst go marry.
Neither art thou an even match for Helga while thou art so unsettled,
and therefore this cannot so much as be looked at.”

Gunnlaug says, “Where lookest thou for a match for thy daughter, if
thou wilt not give her to the son of Illugi the Black; or who are they
throughout Burg-firth who are of more note than he?”

Thorstein answered: “I will not play at men-mating,” says he, “but if
thou wert such a man as he is, thou wouldst not be turned away.”

Gunnlaug said, “To whom wilt thou give thy daughter rather than to me?”

Said Thorstein, “Hereabout are many good men to choose from. Thorfin of
Red-Mel hath seven sons, and all of them men of good manners.”

Gunnlaug answers, “Neither Onund nor Thorfin are men as good as my
father. Nay, thou thyself clearly fallest short of him--or what hast
thou to set against his strife with Thorgrim the Priest, the son of
Kiallak, and his sons, at Thorsness Thing, where he carried all that was
in debate?”

Thorstein answers, “I drave away Steinar, the son of Onund Sioni, which
was deemed somewhat of a deed.”

Gunnlaug says, “Therein thou wast holpen by thy father Egil; and, to end
all, it is for few bonders to cast away my alliance.”

Said Thorstein, “Carry thy cowing away to the fellows up yonder at the
mountains; for down here, on the Meres, it shall avail thee nought.”

Now in the evening they come home; but next morning Gunnlaug rode up to
Gilsbank, and prayed his father to ride with him a-wooing out to Burg.

Illugi answered, “Thou art an unsettled man, being bound for faring
abroad, but makest now as if thou wouldst busy thyself with wife-wooing;
and so much do I know, that this is not to Thorstein’s mind.”

Gunnlaug answers, “I shall go abroad all the same, nor shall I be well
pleased but if thou further this.”

So after this Illugi rode with eleven men from home down to Burg,
and Thorstein greeted him well. Early in the morning Illugi said to
Thorstein, “I would speak to thee.”

“Let us go, then, to the top of the Burg, and talk together there,” says
Thorstein; and so they did, and Gunnlaug went with them.

Then said Illugi, “My kinsman Gunnlaug tells me that he has begun a
talk with thee on his own behalf, praying that he might woo thy daughter
Helga; but now I would fain know what is like to come of this matter.
His kin is known to thee, and our possessions; from my hand shall be
spared neither land nor rule over men, if such things might perchance
further matters.”

Thorstein said, “Herein alone Gunnlaug pleases me not, that I find him
an unsettled man; but if he were of a mind like thine, little would I
hang back.”

Illugi said, “It will cut our friendship across if thou gainsayest me
and my son an equal match.”

Thorstein answers, “For thy words and our friendship then, Helga shall
be vowed, but not betrothed, to Gunnlaug, and shall bide for him three
winters: but Gunnlaug shall go abroad and shape himself to the ways of
good men; but I shall be free from all these matters if he does not then
come back, or if his ways are not to my liking.”

Thereat they parted; Illugi rode home, but Gunnlaug rode to his ship.
But when they had wind at will they sailed for the main, and made
the northern part of Norway, and sailed landward along Thrandheim to
Nidaros; there they rode in the harbour, and unshipped their goods.




CHAPTER VII.     Of Gunnlaug in the East and the West.

In those days Earl Eric, the son of Hakon, and his brother Svein, ruled
in Norway. Earl Eric abode as then at Hladir, which was left to him by
his father, and a mighty lord he was. Skuli, the son of Thorstein, was
with the earl at that time, and was one of his court, and well esteemed.

Now they say that Gunnlaug and Audun Festargram, and seven of them
together, went up to Hladir to the earl. Gunnlaug was so clad that he
had on a grey kirtle and white long-hose; he had a boil on his foot by
the instep, and from this oozed blood and matter as he strode on. In
this guise he went before the earl with Audun and the rest of them,
and greeted him well. The earl knew Audun, and asked him tidings from
Iceland. Audun told him what there was toward. Then the earl asked
Gunnlaug who he was, and Gunnlaug told him his name and kin. Then
the earl said: “Skuli Thorstein’s son, what manner of man is this in
Iceland?”

“Lord,” says he, “give him good welcome, for he is the son of the best
man in Iceland, Illugi the Black of Gilsbank, and my foster-brother
withal.”

The earl asked, “What ails thy foot, Icelander?”

“A boil, lord,” said he.

“And yet thou wentest not halt?”

Gunnlaug answers, “Why go halt while both legs are long alike?”

Then said one of the earl’s men, called Thorir: “He swaggereth hugely,
this Icelander! It would not be amiss to try him a little.”

Gunnlaug looked at him and sang:--

          “A courtman there is
          Full evil I wis,
          A bad man and black,
          Belief let him lack.”

Then would Thorir seize an axe. The earl spake: “Let it be,” says he;
“to such things men should pay no heed. But now, Icelander, how old a
man art thou?”

Gunnlaug answers: “I am eighteen winters old as now,” says he.

Then says Earl Eric, “My spell is that thou shalt not live eighteen
winters more.”

Gunnlaug said, somewhat under his breath: “Pray not against me, but for
thyself rather.”

The earl asked thereat, “What didst thou say, Icelander?”

Gunnlaug answers, “What I thought well befitting, that thou shouldst bid
no prayers against me, but pray well for thyself rather.”

“What prayers, then?” says the earl.

“That thou mightest not meet thy death after the manner of Earl Hakon,
thy father.”

The earl turned red as blood, and bade them take the rascal in haste;
but Skuli stepped up to the earl, and said: “Do this for my words, lord,
and give this man peace, so that he depart at his swiftest.”

The earl answered, “At his swiftest let him be off then, if he will have
peace, and never let him come again within mv realm.”

Then Skuli went out with Gunnlaug down to the bridges, where there was
an England-bound ship ready to put out; therein Skuli got for Gunnlaug
a berth, as well as for Thorkel, his kinsman; but Gunnlaug gave his ship
into Audun’s ward, and so much of his goods as he did not take with him.

Now sail Gunnlaug and his fellows into the English main, and come at
autumntide south to London Bridge, where they hauled ashore their ship.

Now at that time King Ethelred, the son of Edgar, ruled over England,
and was a good lord; this winter he sat in London. But in those days
there was the same tongue in England as in Norway and Denmark; but the
tongues changed when William the Bastard won England, for thenceforward
French went current there, for he was of French kin.

Gunnlaug went presently to the king, and greeted him well and worthily,
The king asked him from what land he came, and Gunnlaug told him all as
it was. “But,” said he, “I have come to meet thee, lord, for that I have
made a song on thee, and I would that it might please thee to hearken to
that song.” The king said it should be so, and Gunnlaug gave forth the
song well and proudly; and this is the burden thereof:--

          “As God are all folk fearing
          The free lord King of England,
          Kin of all kings and all folk,
          To Ethelred the head tow.”

The king thanked him for the song, and gave him as song-reward a scarlet
cloak lined with the costliest of furs, and golden-broidered down to the
hem; and made him his man; and Gunnlaug was with him all the winter, and
was well accounted of.

One day, in the morning early, Gunnlaug met three men in a certain
street, and Thororm was the name of their leader; he was big and strong,
and right evil to deal with. He said, “Northman, lend me some money.”

Gunnlaug answered, “That were ill counselled to lend one’s money to
unknown men.”

He said, “I will pay it thee back on a named day.”

“Then shall it be risked,” says Gunnlaug; and he lent him the fee
withal.

But some time afterwards Gunnlaug met the king, and told him of the
money-lending. The king answered, “Now hast thou thriven little, for
this is the greatest robber and reiver; deal with him in no wise, but I
will give thee money as much as thine was.”

Gunnlaug said, “Then do we, your men, do after a sorry sort, if,
treading sackless folk under foot, we let such fellows as this deal us
out our lot. Nay, that shall never be.”

Soon after he met Thororm and claimed the fee of him. He said he was not
going to pay it.

Then sang Gunnlaug:--

          “Evil counselled art thou,
          Gold from us withholding;
          The reddener of the edges,
          Pricking on with tricking.
          Wot ye what? they called me,
          Worm-tongue, yet a youngling;
          Nor for nought so hight I;
          Now is time to show it!”

“Now I will make an offer good in law,” says Gunnlaug; “that thou either
pay me my money, or else that thou go on holm with me in three nights’
space.”

Then laughed the viking, and said, “Before thee none have come to that,
to call me to holm, despite of all the ruin that many a man has had to
take at my hands. Well, I am ready to go.”

Thereon they parted for that time.

Gunnlaug told the king what had befallen; and he said, “Now, indeed,
have things taken a right hopeless turn; for this man’s eyes can dull
any weapon. But thou shalt follow my rede; here is a sword I will
give thee--with that thou shalt fight, but before the battle show him
another.”

Gunnlaug thanked the king well therefor.

Now when they were ready for the holm, Thororm asked what sort of a
sword it was that he had. Gunnlaug unsheathed it and showed him, but
had a loop round the handle of the king’s sword, and slipped it over
his hand; the bearserk looked on the sword, and said, “I fear not that
sword.”

But now he dealt a blow on Gunnlaug with his sword, and cut off from him
nigh all his shield; Gunnlaug smote in turn with the king’s gift; the
bearserk stood shieldless before him, thinking he had the same weapon he
had shown him, but Gunnlaug smote him his deathblow then and there.

The king thanked him for this work, and he got much fame therefor, both
in England and far and wide elsewhere.

In the spring, when ships sailed from land to land, Gunnlaug prayed King
Ethelred for leave to sail somewhither; the king asks what he was about
then. Gunnlaug said, “I would fulfil what I have given my word to do,”
 and sang this stave withal:--

          “My ways must I be wending
          Three kings’ walls to see yet,
          And earls twain, as I promised
          Erewhile to land-sharers.
          Neither will I wend me
          Back, the worms’-bed lacking,
          By war-lord’s son, the wealth-free,
          For work done gift well given.”

“So be it, then, skald,” said the king, and withal he gave him a ring
that weighed six ounces; “but,” said he, “thou shalt give me thy word to
come back next autumn, for I will not let thee go altogether, because of
thy great prowess.”




CHAPTER VIII.     Of Gunnlaug in Ireland.

Thereafter Gunnlaug sailed from England with chapmen north to Dublin. In
those days King Sigtrygg Silky-beard, son of King Olaf Kvaran and Queen
Kormlada, ruled over Ireland; and he had then borne sway but a little
while. Gunnlaug went before the king, and greeted him well and worthily.
The king received him as was meet. Then Gunnlaug said, “I have made a
song on thee, and I would fain have silence therefor.”

The king answered, “No men have before now come forward with songs for
me, and surely will I hearken to thine.” Then Gunnlaug brought the song,
whereof this is the burden,--

          “Swaru’s steed
          Doth Sigtrygg feed.”

And this is therein also:--

          “Praise-worth I can
          Well measure in man,
          And kings, one by one--
          Lo here, Kvararis son!
          Gruageth the king
          Gift of gold ring?
          I, singer, know
          His wont to bestow.
          Let the high king say,
          Heard he or this day,
          Song drapu-measure
          Dearer a treasure?”

The king thanked him for the song, and called his treasurer to him, and
said, “How shall the song be rewarded?”

“What hast thou will to give, lord?” says he.

“How will it be rewarded if I give him two ships for it?” said the king.

Then said the treasurer, “This is too much, lord; other kings give in
regard of songs good keepsakes, fair swords, or golden rings.”

So the king gave him his own raiment of new scarlet, a gold-embroidered
kirtle, and a cloak lined with choice furs, and a gold ring which
weighed a mark. Gunnlaug thanked him well.

He dwelt a short time here, and then went thence to the Orkneys.

Then was lord in Orkney, Earl Sigurd, the son of Hlodver; he was
friendly to Icelanders. Now Gunnlaug greeted the earl well, and said he
had a song to bring him. The earl said he would listen thereto, since he
was of such great kin in Iceland.

Then Gunnlaug brought the song; it was a shorter lay, and well done. The
earl gave him for lay-reward a broad axe, all inlaid with silver, and
bade him abide with him.

Gunnlaug thanked him both for his gift and his offer, but said he was
bound east for Sweden; and thereafter he went on board ship with chapmen
who sailed to Norway.

In the autumn they came east to King’s Cliff, Thorkel, his kinsman,
being with him all the time. From King’s Cliff they got a guide up to
West Gothland, and came upon a cheaping-stead, called Skarir: there
ruled an earl called Sigurd, a man stricken in years. Gunnlaug went
before him, and told him he had made a song on him; the earl gave a
willing ear hereto, and Gunnlaug brought the song, which was a shorter
lay.

The earl thanked him, and rewarded the song well, and bade him abide
there that winter.

Earl Sigurd had a great Yule-feast in the winter, and on Yule-eve came
thither men sent from Earl Eric of Norway, twelve of them together, and
brought gifts to Earl Sigurd. The earl made them good cheer, and bade
them sit by Gunnlaug through the Yule-tide; and there was great mirth at
drinks.

Now the Gothlanders said that no earl was greater or of more fame than
Earl Sigurd; but the Norwegians thought that Earl Eric was by far the
foremost of the two. Hereon would they bandy words, till they both took
Gunnlaug to be umpire in the matter.

Then he sang this stave:--

          “Tell ye, staves of spear-din,
          How on sleek-side sea-horse
          Oft this earl hath proven
          Over-toppling billows;
          But Eric, victory’s ash-tree,
          Oft hath seen in east-seas
          More of high blue billows
          Before the bows a-roaring.”

Both sides were content with his finding, but the Norwegians the best.
But after Yule-tide those messengers left with gifts of goodly things,
which Earl Sigurd sent to Earl Eric.

Now they told Earl Eric of Gunnlaug’s finding: the earl thought that he
had shown upright dealing and friendship to him herein, and let out some
words, saying that Gunnlaug should have good peace throughout his land.
What the earl had said came thereafter to the ears of Gunnlaug.

But now Earl Sigurd gave Gunnlaug a guide east to Tenthland, in Sweden,
as he had asked.




CHAPTER IX. Of the Quarrel between Gunnlaug and Raven before the Swedish King.

In those days King Olaf the Swede, son of King Eric the Victorious, and
Sigrid the High-counselled, daughter of Skogul Tosti, ruled over Sweden.
He was a mighty king and renowned, and full fain of fame.

Gunnlaug came to Upsala towards the time of the Thing of the Swedes in
spring-tide; and when he got to see the king, he greeted him. The
king took his greeting well, and asked who he was. He said he was an
Iceland-man.

Then the king called out: “Raven,” says he, “what man is he in Iceland?”

Then one stood up from the lower bench, a big man and a stalwart, and
stepped up before the king, and spake: “Lord,” says he, “he is of good
kin, and himself the most stalwart of men.”

“Let him go, then, and sit beside thee,” said the king.

Then Gunnlaug said, “I have a song to set forth before thee, king, and I
would fain have peace while thou hearkenest thereto.”

“Go ye first, and sit ye down,” says the king, “for there is no leisure
now to sit listening to songs.”

So they did as he bade them.

Now Gunnlaug and Raven fell a-talking together, and each told each of
his travels. Raven said that he had gone the summer before from Iceland
to Norway, and had come east to Sweden in the forepart of winter. They
soon got friendly together.

But one day, when the Thing was over, they were both before the king,
Gunnlaug and Raven.

Then spake Gunnlaug, “Now, lord, I would that thou shouldst hear the
song.”

“That I may do now,” said the king.

“My song too will I set forth now,” says Raven.

“Thou mayst do so,” said the king.

Then Gunnlaug said, “I will set forth mine first if thou wilt have it
so, king.”

“Nay,” said Raven, “it behoveth me to be first, lord, for I myself came
first to thee.”

“Whereto came our fathers forth, so that my father was the little boat
towed behind? Whereto, but nowhere?” says Gunnlaug. “And in likewise
shall it be with us.”

Raven answered, “Let us be courteous enough not to make this a matter of
bandying of words. Let the king rule here.”

The king said, “Let Gunnlaug set forth his song first, for he will not
be at peace till he has his will.”

Then Gunnlaug set forth the song which he had made to King Olaf, and
when it was at an end the king spake. “Raven,” says he, “how is the song
done?”

“Right well,” he answered; “it is a song full of big words and little
beauty; a somewhat rugged song, as is Gunnlaug’s own mood.”

“Well, Raven, thy song,” said the king.

Raven gave it forth, and when it was done the king said, “How is this
song made, Gunnlaug?”

“Well it is, lord,” he said; “this is a pretty song, as is Raven himself
to behold, and delicate of countenance. But why didst thou make a short
song on the king, Raven? Didst thou perchance deem him unworthy of a
long one?”

Raven answered, “Let us not talk longer on this; matters will be taken
up again, though it be later.”

And thereat, they parted.

Soon after Raven became a man of King Olaf’s, and asked him leave to
go away. This the king granted him. And when Raven was ready to go, he
spake to Gunnlaug, and said, “Now shall our friendship be ended, for
that thou must needs shame me here before great men; but in time to come
I shall cast on thee no less shame than thou hadst will to cast on me
here.”

Gunnlaug answers: “Thy threats grieve me nought. Nowhere are we likely
to come where I shall be thought less worthy than thou.”

King Olaf gave to Raven good gifts at parting, and thereafter.




CHAPTER X.     How Raven came home to Iceland, and asked for Helga to Wife.

Now this spring Raven came from the east to Thrandheim, and fitted out
his ship, and sailed in the summer to Iceland. He brought his ship to
Leiruvag, below the Heath, and his friends and kinsmen were right fain
of him. That winter he was at home with his father, but the summer after
he met at the Althing his kinsman, Skapti the law-man.

Then said Raven to him, “Thine aid would I have to go a-wooing to
Thorstein Egilson, to bid Helga his daughter.”

Skapti answered, “But is she not already vowed to Gunnlaug Worm-tongue?”

Said Raven, “Is not the appointed time of waiting between them passed
by? And far too wanton is he withal, that he should hold or heed it
aught.”

“Let us then do as thou wouldst,” said Skapti.

Thereafter they went with many men to the booth of Thorstein Egilson,
and he greeted them well.

Then Skapti spoke: “Raven, my kinsman, is minded to woo thy daughter
Helga. Thou knowest well his blood, his wealth, and his good manners,
his many mighty kinsmen and friends.”

Thorstein said, “She is already the vowed maiden of Gunnlaug, and with
him shall I hold all words spoken.”

Skapti said, “Are not the three winters worn now that were named between
you?”

“Yes,” said Thorstein; “but the summer is not yet worn, and he may still
come out this summer.”

Then Skapti said, “But if he cometh not this summer, what hope may we
have of the matter then?”

Thorstein answered, “We are like to come here next summer, and then
may we see what may wisely be done, but it will not do to speak hereof
longer as at this time.”

Thereon they parted. And men rode home from the Althing. But this talk
of Raven’s wooing of Helga was nought hidden.

That summer Gunnlaug came not out.

The next summer, at the Althing, Skapti and his folk pushed the wooing
eagerly, and said that Thorstein was free as to all matters with
Gunnlaug.

Thorstein answered, “I have few daughters to see to, and fain am I that
they should not be the cause of strife to any man. Now I will first see
Illugi the Black.” And so he did. .

And when they met, he said to Illugi, “Dost thou not think that I am
free from all troth with thy son Gunnlaug?”

Illugi said, “Surely, if thou wiliest it. Little can I say herein, as I
do not know clearly what Gunnlaug is about.”

Then Thorstein went to Skapti, and a bargain was struck that the wedding
should be at Burg, about winter-nights, if Gunnlaug did not come out
that summer; but that Thorstein should be free from all troth with Raven
if Gunnlaug should come and fetch his bride.

After this men ride home from the Thing, and Gunnlaug’s coming was long
drawn out. But Helga thought evilly of all these redes.




CHAPTER XI.     Of how Gunnlaug must needs abide away from Iceland.

Now it is to be told of Gunnlaug that he went from Sweden the same
summer that Raven went to Iceland, and good gifts he had from King Olaf
at parting.

King Ethelred welcomed Gunnlaug worthily, and that winter he was with
the king, and was held in great honour.

In those days Knut the Great, son of Svein, ruled Denmark, and had
new-taken his father’s heritage, and he vowed ever to wage war on
England, for that his father had won a great realm there before he died
west in that same land.

And at that time there was a great army of Danish men west there, whose
chief was Heming, the son of Earl Strut-Harald, and brother to Earl
Sigvaldi, and he held for King Knut that land that Svein had won.

Now in the spring Gunnlaug asked the king for leave to go away, but he
said, “It ill beseems that thou, my man, shouldst go away now, when all
bodes such mighty war in the land.”

Gunnlaug said, “Thou shalt rule, lord; but give me leave next summer to
depart, if the Danes come not.”

The king answered, “Then we shall see.”

Now this summer went by, and the next winter, but no Danes came; and
after midsummer Gunnlaug got his leave to depart from the king, and went
thence east to Norway, and found Earl Eric in Thrandheim, at Hladir, and
the earl greeted him well, and bade him abide with him. Gunnlaug thanked
him for his offer, but said he would first go out to Iceland, to look to
his promised maiden.

The earl said, “Now all ships bound for Iceland have sailed.”

Then said one of the court, “Here lay, yesterday, Hallfred
Troublous-Skald, out tinder Agdaness.”

The earl answered, “That may well be; he sailed hence five nights ago.”

Then Earl Eric had Gunnlaug rowed put to Hallfred, who greeted him with
joy; and forthwith a fair wind bore them from land, and they were right
merry.

This was late in the summer: but now Hallfred said to Gunnlaug, “Hast
thou heard of how Raven, the son of Onund, is wooing Helga the Fair?”

Gunnlaug said he had heard thereof but dimly. Hallfred tells him all he
knew of it, and therewith, too, that it was the talk of many men that
Raven was in nowise less brave a man than Gunnlaug. Then Gunnlaug sang
this stave:--

          “Light the weather wafteth;
          But if this east wind drifted
          Week-long, wild upon us
          Little were I recking;
          More this word I mind of
          Me with Raven mated,
          Than gain for me the gold-foe
          Of days to make me grey-haired.”

Then Hallfred said, “Well, fellow, may’st thou fare better in thy strife
with Raven than I did in mine. I brought my ship some winters ago into
Leiruvag, and had to pay a half-mark in silver to a house-carle of
Raven’s, but I held it back from him. So Raven rode at us with sixty
men, and cut the moorings of the ship, and she was driven up on the
shallows, and we were bound for a wreck. Then I had to give selfdoom
to Raven, and a whole mark I had to pay; and that is the tale of my
dealings with him.”

Then they two talked together alone of Helga the Fair, and Gunnlaug
praised her much for her goodliness; and Gunnlaug sang:--

          “He who brand of battle
          Beareth over-wary,
          Never love shall let him
          Hold the linen-folded;
          For we when we were younger
          In many a way were playing
          On the outward nesses
          From golden land outstanding.”

“Well sung!” said Hallfred.




CHAPTER XII. Of Gunnlaug’s landing, and how he found Helga wedded to Raven.

They made land north by Fox-Plain, in Hraunhaven, half a month before
winter, and there unshipped their goods. Now there was a man called
Thord, a bonder’s son of the Plain, there. He fell to wrestling with the
chapmen, and they mostly got worsted at his hands.

Then a wrestling was settled between him and Gunnlaug. The night before
Thord made vows to Thor for the victory; but the next day, when they
met, they fell-to wrestling. Then Gunnlaug tripped both feet from under
Thord, and gave him a. great fall; but the foot that Gunnlaug stood on
was put out of joint, and Gunnlaug fell together with Thord.

Then said Thord, “Maybe that other things go no better for thee.”

“What then?” says Gunnlaug.

“Thy dealings with Raven, if he wed Helga the Fair at winter-nights. I
was anigh at the Thing when that was settled last summer.”

Gunnlaug answered naught thereto.

Now the foot was swathed, and put into joint again, and it swelled
mightily; but he and Hallfred ride twelve in company till they come to
Gilsbank, in Burg-firth, the very Saturday night when folk sat at the
wedding at Burg. Illugi was fain of his son Gunnlaug and his fellows;
but Gunnlaug said he would ride then and there down to Burg. Illugi said
it was not wise to do so, and to all but Gunnlaug that seemed good. But
Gunnlaug was then unfit to walk, because of his foot, though he would
not let that be seen. Therefore there was no faring to Burg.

On the morrow Hallfred rode to Hreda-water, in North-water dale, where
Galti, his brother and a brisk man, managed their matters.




CHAPTER XIII. Of the Winter-Wedding at Skaney, and how Gunnlaug
gave the Kings Cloak to Helga.

Tells the tale of Raven, that he sat at his weddings-feast at Burg, and
it was the talk of most men that the bride was but drooping; for true is
the saw that saith, “Long we remember what youth gained us,” and even so
it was with her now.

But this new thing befell at the feast, that Hungerd, the daughter
of Thorod and Jofrid, was wooed by a man named Sverting, the son of
Hafr-Biorn, the son of Mold-Gnup, and the wedding was to come off that
winter after Yule, at Skaney, where dwelt Thorkel, a kinsman of Hungerd,
and son of Torn Valbrandsson; and the mother of Torn was Thorodda, the
sister of Odd of the Tongue.

Now Raven went home to Mossfell with Helga his wife. When they had been
there a little while, one morning early before they rose up, Helga was
awake, but Raven slept, and fared ill in his sleep. And when he woke
Helga asked him what he had dreamt. Then Raven sang:--

          “In thine arms, so dreamed I,
          Hewn was I, gold island!
          Bride, in blood I bled there,
          Bed of thine was reddened.
          Never more then mightst thou,
          Mead-bowl’spourer speedy,
          Bind my gashes bloody--
          Lind-leek-bough thou likst it.”

Helga spake: “Never shall I weep therefor,” quoth she; “ye have evilly
beguiled me, and Gunnlaug has surely come out.” And therewith she wept
much.

But, a little after, Gunnlaug’s coming was bruited about, and Helga
became so hard with Raven, that he could not keep her at home at
Mossfell; so that back they had to go to Burg, and Raven got small share
of her company.

Now men get ready for the winter-wedding. Thorkel of Skaney bade Illugi
the Black and his sons. But when master Illugi got ready, Gunnlaug sat
in the hall, and stirred not to go. Illugi went up to him and said, “Why
dost thou not get ready, kinsman?”

Gunnlaug answered, “I have no mind to go.”

Says Illugi, “Nay, but certes thou shalt go, kinsman,” says he; “and
cast thou not grief over thee by yearning for one woman. Make as if thou
knewest nought of it, for women thou wilt never lack.”

Now Gunnlaug did as his father bade him; so they came to the wedding,
and Illugi and his sons were set down in the high seat; but Thorstein
Egilson, and Raven his son-in-law, and the bridegroom’s following, were
set in the other high seat, over against Illugi.

The women sat on the dais, and Helga the Fair sat next to the bride.
Oft she turned her eyes on Gunnlaug, thereby proving the saw, “Eyes will
bewray if maid love man.”

Gunnlaug was well arrayed, and had on him that goodly raiment that King
Sigtrygg had given him; and now he was thought far above all other men,
because of many things, both strength, and goodliness, and growth.

There was little mirth among folk at this wedding. But on the day when
all men were making ready to go away the women stood up and got ready
to go home. Then went Gunnlaug to talk to Helga, and long they talked
together: but Gunnlaug sang:--

          “Light-heart lived the Worm-tongue
          All day long no longer
          In mountain-home, since Helga
          Had name of wife of Raven;
          Nought foresaw thy father,
          Hardener white of fight-thaw,
          What my words should come to.
          --The maid to gold was wedded.”

And again he sang:--

          “Worst reward I owe them,
          Father thine, O wine-may,
          And mother, that they made thee
          So fair beneath thy maid-gear;
          For thou, sweet field of sea-flame,
          All joy hast slain within me.--
          Lo, here, take it, loveliest
          E’er made of lord and lady!”

And therewith Gunnlaug gave Helga the cloak, Ethelred’s-gift, which was
the fairest of things, and she thanked him well for the gift.

Then Gunnlaug went out, and by that time riding-horses had been brought
home and saddled, and among them were many very good ones; and they
were all tied up in the road. Gunnlaug leaps on to a horse, and rides
a hand-gallop along the homefield up to a place where Raven happened
to stand just before him; and Raven had to draw out of his way. Then
Gunnlaug said,--

“No need to slink aback, Raven, for I threaten thee nought as at this
time; but thou knowest forsooth, what thou hast earned.”.

Raven answered and sang,--

          “God of wound-flamed glitter,
          Glorier of fight-goddess,
          Must we fall a-fighting
          For fairest kirtle-bearer?
          Death-staffs many such-like
          Fair as she is are there
          In south-lands o’er the sea floods.
          Sooth saith he who knoweth.”

“Maybe there are many such, but they do not seem so to me,” said
Gunnlaug.

Therewith Illugi and Thorstein ran up to them, and would not have them
fight.

Then Gunnlaug sang,--

          “The fair-hued golden goddess
          For gold to Raven sold they,
          (Raven my match as men say)
          While the mighty isle-king,
          Ethelred, in England
          From eastward way delayed me,
          Wherefore to gold-waster
          Waneth tongue’s speech-hunger.”

Hereafter both rode home, and all was quiet and tidingless that winter
through; but Raven had nought of Helga’s fellowship after her meeting
with Gunnlaug.




CHAPTER XIV.     Of the Holmgang at the Althing.

Now in summer men ride a very many to the Althing: Illugi the Blacky and
his sons with him, Gunnlaug and Hermund; Thorstein Egilson and
Kolsvein his son; Onund, of Mossfell, and his sons all, and Sverting,
Hafr-Biorn’s son. Skapti yet held the spokesmanship-at-law.

One day at the Thing, as men went thronging to the Hill of Laws, and
when the matters of the law were done there, then Gunnlaug craved
silence, and said:--

“Is Raven, the son of Onund, here?”

He said he was.

Then spake Gunnlaug, “Thou well knowest that thou hast got to wife my
avowed bride, and thus hast thou made thyself my foe. Now for this I bid
thee to holm here at the Thing, in the holm of the Axe-water, when three
nights are gone by.”

Raven answers, “This is well bidden, as was to be looked for of thee,
and for this I am ready, whenever thou wiliest it.”

Now the kin of each deemed this a very ill thing. But, at that time it
was lawful for him who thought himself wronged by another to call him to
fight on the holm.

So when three nights had gone by they got ready for the holmgang, and
Illugi the Black followed his son thither with a great following. But
Skapti, the lawman, followed Raven, and his father and other kinsmen of
his.

Now before Gunnlaug went upon the holm he sang,--

          “Out to isle ofeel-field
          Dight am I to hie me:
          Give, O God, thy singer
          With glaive to end the striving.
          Here shall I the head cleave
          Of Helga’s love’s devourer,
          At last my bright sword bringeth
          Sundering of head and body.”

Then Raven answered and sang,--

          “Thou, singer, knowest not surely
          Which of us twain shall gain it;
          With edge for leg-swathe eager,
          Here are the wound-scythes bare now.
          In whatso-wise we wound us,
          The tidings from the Thing here,
          And fame of thanes’ fair doings,
          The fair young maid shall hear it.”

Hermund held shield for his brother, Gunnlaug; but Sverting,
Hafr-Biorn’s son, was Raven’s shield-bearer. Whoso should be wounded was
to ransom himself from the holm with three marks of silver.

Now, Raven’s part it was to deal the first blow, as he was the
challenged man. He hewed at the upper part of Gunnlaug’s shield, and the
sword brake asunder just beneath the hilt, with so great might he smote;
but the point of the sword flew up from the shield and struck Gunnlaug’s
cheek, whereby he got just grazed; with that their fathers ran in
between them, and many other men.

“Now,” said Gunnlaug, “I call Raven overcome, as he is weaponless.”

“But I say that thou art vanquished, since thou art wounded,” said
Raven.

Now, Gunnlaug was nigh mad, and very wrathful, and said it was not tried
out yet.

Illugi, his father, said they should try no more for that time.

Gunnlaug said, “Beyond all things I desire that I might in such wise
meet Raven again, that thou, father, wert not anigh to part us.”

And thereat they parted for that time, and all men went back to their
booths.

But on the second day after this it was made law in the law-court that,
henceforth, all holmgangs should be forbidden; and this was done by the
counsel of all the wisest men that were at the Thing; and there, indeed,
were all the men of most counsel in all the land. And this was the last
holmgang fought in Iceland, this, wherein Gunnlaug and Raven fought.

But this Thing was the third most thronged Thing that has been held
in Iceland; the first was after Njal’s burning, the second after the
Heath-slaughters.

Now, one morning, as the brothers Hermund and Gunnlaug went to Axe-water
to wash, on the other side went many women towards the river, and in
that company was Helga the Fair. Then said Hermund,--

“Dost thou see thy friend Helga there on the other side of the river?”

“Surely, I see her,” says Gunnlaug, and withal he sang:--

          “Born was she for men’s bickering:
          Sore bale hath wrought the war-stemy
          And I yearned ever madly
          To hold that oak-tree golden.
          To me then, me destroyer
          Of swan-mead’s flame, unneedful
          This looking on the dark-eyed,
          This golden land’s beholding.”

Therewith they crossed the river, and Helga and Gunnlaug spake awhile
together, and as the brothers crossed the river eastward back again,
Helga stood and gazed long after Gunnlaug.

Then Gunnlaug looked back and sang:--

          “Moon of linen-lapped one,
          Leek-sea-bearing goddess,
          Hawk-keen out of heaven
          Shone all bright upon me;
          But that eyelid’s moonbeam
          Of gold-necklaced goddess
          Her hath all undoing
          Wrought, and me made nought of.”




CHAPTER XV. How Gunnlaug and Raven agreed to go East to Norway,
to try the matter again.

Now after these things were gone by men rode home from the Thing, and
Gunnlaug dwelt at home at Gilsbank.

On a morning when he awoke all men had risen up, but he alone still lay
abed; he lay in a shut-bed behind the seats. Now into the hall came
twelve men, all full armed, and who should be there but Raven, Onund’s
son; Gunnlaug sprang up forthwith, and got to his weapons.

But Raven spake, “Thou art in risk of no hurt this time,” quoth he, “but
my errand hither is what thou shalt now hear: Thou didst call me to a
holmgang last summer at the Althing, and thou didst not deem matters to
be fairly tried therein; now I will offer thee this, that we both fare
away from Iceland, and go abroad next summer, and go on holm in Norway,
for there our kinsmen are not like to stand in our way.”

Gunnlaug answered, “Hail to thy words, stoutest of men! this thine offer
I take gladly; and here, Raven, mayest thou have cheer as good as thou
mayest desire.”

“It is well offered,” said Raven, “but this time we shall first have to
ride away.” Thereon they parted.

Now the kinsmen of both sore misliked them of this, but could in no wise
undo it, because of the wrath of Gunnlaug and Raven; and, after all,
that must betide that drew towards.

Now it is to be said of Raven that he fitted out his ship in Leiruvag;
two men are named that went with him, sisters’ sons of his father Onund,
one hight Grim, the other Olaf, doughty men both. All the kinsmen of
Raven thought it great scathe when he went away, but he said he had
challenged Gunnlaug to the holmgang because he could have no joy soever
of Helga; and he said, withal, that one must fall before the other.

So Raven put to sea, when he had wind at will, and brought his ship to
Thrandheim, and was there that winter and heard nought of Gunnlaug that
winter through; there lie abode him the summer following: and still
another winter was he in Thrandheim, at a place called Lifangr.

Gunnlaug Worm-tongue took ship with Hallfred Troublous-Skald, in the
north at The Plain; they were very late ready for sea.

They sailed into the main when they had a fair wind, and made Orkney a
little before the winter. Earl Sigurd Lodverson was still lord over the
isles, and Gunnlaug went to him and abode there that winter, and the
earl held him of much account.

In the spring the earl would go on warfare, and Gunnlaug made ready to
go with him; and that summer they harried wide about the South-isles
and Scotland’s firths, and had many fights, and Gunnlaug always showed
himself the bravest and doughtiest of fellows, and the hardiest of men
wherever they came.

Earl Sigurd went back home early in the summer, but Gurmlaug took ship
with chapmen, sailing for Norway, and he and Earl Sigurd parted in great
friendship.

Gunnlaug fared north to Thrandheim, to Hladir, to see Earl Eric, and
dwelt there through the early winter; the earl welcomed him gladly, and
made offer to Gunnlaug to stay with him, and Gunnlaug agreed thereto.

The earl had heard already how all had befallen between Gunnlaug and
Raven, and he told Gunnlaug that he laid ban on their fighting within
his realm; Gunnlaug said the earl should be free to have his will
herein.

So Gunnlaug abode there the winter through, ever heavy of mood.




CHAPTER XVI.     How the two Foes met and fought at Dingness.

But on a day in spring Gunnlaug was walking abroad, and his kinsman
Thorkel with him; they walked away from the town, till on the meads.
before them they saw a ring of men, and in that ring were two men with
weapons fencing; but one was named Raven, the other Gunnlaug, while they
who stood by said that Icelanders smote light, and were slow to remember
their words.

Gunnlaug saw the great mocking hereunder, and much jeering was brought
into the play; and withal he went away silent.

So a little while after he said to the earl that he had no mind to bear
any longer the jeers and mocks of his courtiers about his dealings with
Raven, and therewith he prayed the earl to give him a guide to Lifangr:
now before this the earl had been told that Raven had left Lifangr and
gone east to Sweden; therefore, he granted Gunnlaug leave to go, and
gave him two guides for the journey.

Now Gunnlaug went from Hladir with six men to Lifangr; and, on the
morning of the very day whereas Gunnlaug came in in the evening, Raven
had left Lifangr with four men. Thence Gunnlaug went to Vera-dale, and
came always in the evening to where Raven had been the night before.

So Gunnlaug went on till he came to the uppermost farm in the valley,
called Sula, wherefrom had Raven fared in the morning; there he stayed
not his journey, but kept on his way through the night.

Then in the morning at sun-rise they saw one another. Raven had got to
a place where were two waters, and between them flat meads, and they
are called Gleipni’s meads: but into one water stretched a little ness
called Dingness. There on the ness Raven and his fellows, five together,
took their stand. With Raven were his kinsmen, Grim and Olaf.

Now when they met, Gunnlaug said, “It is well that we have found one
another.”

Raven said that he had nought to quarrel with therein;

“But now,” says he, “thou mayest choose as thou wilt, either that we
fight alone together, or that we fight all of us man to man.”

Gunnlaug said that either way seemed good to him.

Then spake Raven’s kinsmen, Grim and Olaf, and said that they would
little like to stand by and look on the fight, and in like wise spake
Thorkel the Black, the kinsman of Gunnlaug.

Then said Gunnlaug to the earl’s guides, “Ye shall sit by and aid
neither side, and be here to tell of our meeting;” and so they did.

So they set on, and fought dauntlessly, all of them. Grim and Olaf went
both against Gunnlaug alone, and so closed their dealings with him that
Gunnlaug slew them both and got no wound. This proves Thord Kolbeinson
in a song that he made on Gunnlaug the Wormtongue:--

          “Grim and Olaf great-hearts
          In Gondul’s din, with thin sword
          First did Gunnlaug fell there
          Ere at Raven fared he;
          Bold, with blood be-drifted
          Bane of three the thane was;
          War-lord of the wave-horse
          Wrought for men folks’ slaughter.”

Meanwhile Raven and Thorkel the Black, Gunnlaug’s kinsman, fought until
Thorkel fell before Raven and lost his life; and so at last all their
fellowship fell. Then they two alone fought together with fierce
onsets and mighty strokes, which they dealt each the other, falling on
furiously without stop or stay.

Gunnlaug had the sword Ethelred’s-gift, and that was the best of
weapons. At last Gunnlaug dealt a mighty blow at Raven, and cut his leg
from under him; but none the more did Raven fall, but swung round up to
a tree-stem, whereat he steadied the stump.

Then said Gunnlaug, “Now thou art no more meet for battle, nor will I
fight with thee any longer, a maimed man.”

Raven answered: “So it is,” said he, “that my lot is now all the worser
lot, but it were well with me yet, might I but drink somewhat.”

Gunnlaug said, “Bewray me not if I bring thee water in my helm.”

“I will not bewray thee,” said Raven. Then went Gunnlaug to a brook and
fetched water in his helm, and brought it to Raven; but Raven stretched
forth his left hand to take it, but with his right hand drave his sword
into Gunnlaug’s head, and that was a mighty great wound.

Then Gunnlaug said, “Evilly hast thou beguiled me, and done traitorously
wherein I trusted thee.”

Raven answers, “Thou sayest sooth, but this brought me to it, that I
begrudged thee to lie in the bosom of Helga the Fair.”

Thereat they fought on, recking of nought; but the end of it was that
Gunnlaug overcame Raven, and there Raven lost his life..

Then the earl’s guides came forward and bound the head-wound of
Gunnlaug, and in meanwhile, he sat and sang:--

          “O thou sword-storm stirrer,
          Raven, stem of battle
          Famous, fared against me
          Fiercely in the spear din.
          Many a flight of metal
          Was borne on me this morning,
          By the spear-walls’ builder,
          Ring-bearer, on hard Dingness.”

After that they buried the dead, and got Gunnlaug on to his horse
thereafter, and brought him right down to Lifangr. There he lay three
nights, and got all his rights of a priest, and died thereafter, and was
buried at the church there.

All men thought it great scathe of both of these men, Gunnlaug and
Raven, amid such deeds as they died.




CHAPTER XVII.     The News of the Fight brought to Iceland.

Now this summer, before these tidings were brought out hither to
Iceland, Illugi the Black, being at home at Gilsbank, dreamed a dream:
he thought that Gunnlaug came to him in his sleep, all bloody, and he
sang in the dream this stave before him; and Illugi remembered the song
when he woke, and sang it before others:--

          “Knew I of the hewing
          Of Raven’s hilt-finned steel-fish
          Byrny-shearing--sword-edge
          Sharp clave leg of Raven.--
          Of warm wounds drank the eagle,
          When the war-rod slender,
          Cleaver of the corpses,
          Clave the head of Gunnlaug.”

This portent befel south at Mossfell, the self-same night, that Onund
dreamed how Raven came to him, covered all over with blood, and sang:--

          “Red is the sword, but I now
          Am undone by Sword-Odin.
          ‘Gainst shields beyond the sea-flood
          The ruin of shields was wielded.
          Methinks the blood-fowl blood-stained
          In blood der men’s heads stood there,
          The wound-erne yet wound-eager
          Trod over wounded bodies?”

Now the second summer after this, Illugi the Black spoke at the Althing
from the Hill of Laws, and said:--

“Wherewith wilt thou make atonement to me for my son, whom Raven, thy
son, beguiled in his troth?”

Onund answers, “Be it far from me to atone for him, so sorely as their
meeting hath wounded me. Yet will I not ask atonement of thee for my
son.”

“Then shall my wrath come home to some of thy kin,” says Illugi. And
withal after the Thing was Illugi at most times very sad.

Tells the tale how this autumn Illugi rode from Gilsbank with thirty
men, and came to Mossfell early in the morning. Then Onund got into the
church with his sons, and took sanctuary; but Illugi caught two of his
kin, one called Biorn and the other Thorgrim, and had Biorn slain, but
the feet smitten from Thorgrim. And thereafter Illugi rode home, and
there was no righting of this for Onund.

Hermund, Illugi’s son, had little joy after the death of Gunnlaug his
brother, and deemed he was none the more avenged even though this had
been wrought.

Now there was a man called Raven, brother’s son to Onund of Mossfell;
he was a great sea-farer, and had a ship that lay up in Ramfirth: and in
the spring Hermund Illugison rode from home alone north over Holt-beacon
Heath, even to Ramfirth, and out as far as Board-ere to the ship of
the chapmen. The chapmen were then nearly ready for sea; Raven, the
ship-master, was on shore, and many men with him; Hermund rode up to
him, and thrust him through with his spear, and rode away forthwith: but
all Raven’s men were bewildered at seeing Hermund.

No atonement came for this slaying, and therewith ended the dealings of
Illugi the Black and Onund of Mossfell.




CHAPTER XVIII.     The Death of Helga the Fair.

AS time went on, Thorstein Egilson married his daughter Helga to a man
called Thorkel, son of Hallkel, who lived west in Hraundale. Helga went
to his house with him, but loved him little, for she cannot cease to
think of Gunnlaug, though he be dead. Yet was Thorkel a doughty man, and
wealthy of goods, and a good skald.

They had children together not a few, one of them was called Thorarin,
another Thorstein, and yet more they had.

But Helga’s chief joy was to pluck at the threads of that cloak,
Gunnlaug’s gift, and she would be ever gazing at it.

But on a time there came a great sickness to the house of Thorkel and
Helga, and many were bed-ridden for a long time. Helga also fell sick,
and yet she could not keep abed.

So one Saturday evening Helga sat in the fire-hall, and leaned her head
upon her husband’s knees, and had the cloak Gunnlaug’s gift sent for;
and when the cloak came to her she sat up and plucked at it, and gazed
thereon awhile, and then sank back upon her husband’s bosom, and was
dead. Then Thorkel sang this:--

         “Dead in mine arms she droopeth,
          My dear one, gold-rings bearer,
          For God hath changed the life-days
          Of this Lady of the linen.
          Weary pain hath pined her,
          But unto me, the seeker
          Of hoard of fishes highway,
          Abiding here is wearier.”

Helga was buried in the church there, but Thorke dwelt yet at Hraundale:
but a great matter seemed the death of Helga to all, as was to be looked
for.

AND HERE ENDETH THE STORY.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story Of Gunnlaug The Worm-Tongue
And Raven The Skald, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORY OF GUNNLAUG ***

***** This file should be named 24421-0.txt or 24421-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/4/2/24421/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
