The Project Gutenberg EBook of Samuel Richardson's Introduction to Pamela, by 
Samuel Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Samuel Richardson's Introduction to Pamela

Author: Samuel Richardson

Editor: Sheridan W. Baker, Jr.

Release Date: March 17, 2008 [EBook #24860]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INTRODUCTION TO PAMELA ***




Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner, Chris Curnow and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber’s Note:

This e-text comes in three different forms: unicode (utf-8), latin-1 and
ascii-7.

  --If “œ” displays as a single character, and apostrophes and quotation
  marks are “curly” or angled, you have the utf-8 version (best). If any
  part of this paragraph displays as garbage, try changing your text
  reader’s “character set” or “file encoding“. If that doesn’t work,
  proceed to:
  --If “œ” is two letters, but words like “étude” have accents, you have
  the latin-1 version. Apostrophes and quotation marks will be straight
  (“typewriter” form). Again, if you see any garbage in this paragraph
   and can’t get it to display properly, use:
  --The ascii-7 or rock-bottom version. All necessary text will still be
  there; it just won’t be as pretty.

In the 18th-century text, the variable length of long dashes reproduces
the original. Those shown as --- were printed as three distinct hyphens;
those shown as -- or ---- were single long dashes.

The printed book used hand-drawn brackets and sidenotes to incorporate
information from different editions of the original text, as explained
in the editor’s introduction:

  The text is that of the second edition.... Brackets, added to this
  lithoprint, show Richardson’s principal corrections: “4th” means
  that the bracketed lines were deleted in the fourth and all
  subsequent editions; “4th, change 6” means that in the fourth and
  subsequent editions the bracketed lines were changed to the reading
  listed here as number six. Several changes within deleted passages
  are discussed but not marked on the text.

In this e-text, marginal brackets are shown as braces { } at the
beginning and end of each bracketed section, with sidenotes shown
immediately before the bracketed text. Brackets or sidenotes that
spanned multiple paragraphs are repeated for each paragraph. Numbered
changes are shown as printed, at the end of the Introduction.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

          The Augustan Reprint Society


              SAMUEL RICHARDSON’S

            Introduction to _Pamela_


        Edited, with an Introduction by

             Sheridan W. Baker, Jr.


              Publication Number 48


                   Los Angeles
     William Andrews Clark Memorial Library
            University of California

                      1954




GENERAL EDITORS

  RICHARD C. BOYS, University of Michigan
  RALPH COHEN, University of California, Los Angeles
  VINTON A. DEARING, University of California, Los Angeles
  LAWRENCE CLARK POWELL, Clark Memorial Library

ASSISTANT EDITOR

  W. EARL BRITTON, University of Michigan

ADVISORY EDITORS

  EMMETT L. AVERY, State College of Washington
  BENJAMIN BOYCE, Duke University
  LOUIS BREDVOLD, University of Michigan
  JOHN BUTT, King’s College, University of Durham
  JAMES L. CLIFFORD, Columbia University
  ARTHUR FRIEDMAN, University of Chicago
  EDWARD NILES HOOKER, University of California, Los Angeles
  LOUIS A. LANDA, Princeton University
  SAMUEL H. MONK, University of Minnesota
  ERNEST C. MOSSNER, University of Texas
  JAMES SUTHERLAND, University College, London
  H. T. SWEDENBERG, JR., University of California, Los Angeles

CORRESPONDING SECRETARY

  EDNA C. DAVIS, Clark Memorial Library




INTRODUCTION


Since most publishers of _Pamela_ have preferred to print
Richardson’s table of contents from the sixth edition, his complete
introduction (his preface, together with letters to the editor and
comments) is missing even from some of our best collections.
Occasionally one finds the preface and the first two letters, but only
four publishers since Richardson have attempted to reprint the full
introduction. Harrison (London, 1785) -- who omits the first letter --
and Cooke (London, 1802-3) both follow Richardson’s eighth edition;
Ballantyne (Edinburgh, 1824) uses the fourth; the Shakespeare Head
(Oxford, 1929), the third. And even these printings leave one
dissatisfied. The Shakespeare Head gives the fullest text, but naturally
omits Richardson’s revisions; Cooke gives the introduction in its final
form, but one misses the full text which accompanied the book in its
heyday; and rarely are both Cooke and Shakespeare Head to be found in
the same library.

Richardson’s complete introduction gains importance when we note that he
retained and revised it through seven of his eight editions of _Pamela_.
To see the text and follow Richardson’s changes is to get an unusually
intimate view of his attitude toward his book, of his concessions and
tenacities, of Richardson the anonymous “editor” who could not keep the
author’s laurels completely under his hat.

This present reprint, therefore, intends to give the fullest text of
Richardson’s introduction, and to indicate his changes. The text is that
of the second edition, reproduced with permission of the Huntington
Library. Brackets, added to this lithoprint, show Richardson’s principal
corrections: “4th” means that the bracketed lines were deleted in the
fourth and all subsequent editions; “4th, change 6” means that in the
fourth and subsequent editions the bracketed lines were changed to the
reading listed here as number six. Several changes within deleted
passages are discussed but not marked on the text.

Richardson’s own editions of _Pamela_ appeared as follows: (1) November
6, 1740, (2) February 14, 1741, (3) March 12, 1741, (4) May 5, 1741,
(5) September 22, 1741, (6) May 10, 1742, (7) 1754, (8) October 28,
1761[1] (three months after Richardson’s death). The first edition
prints Richardson’s preface and two complimentary letters. To these the
“Introduction to this Second Edition” adds twenty-four pages of letters
and comment and the third edition makes no changes in the introduction
whatsoever, even retaining “this Second Edition,”[2] The fourth makes
some changes, and the fifth, considerably more. The sixth, a handsome
quarto in a row of duodecimos, abandons the introductory letters; the
seventh follows the fifth, and the eight makes some major cuts.

Notwithstanding Richardson’s freedom in editing these letters -- and
Fielding’s insinuation in _Shamela_ that they were Richardson’s own copy
-- he wrote none of them. Jean Baptiste de Freval, a Frenchman living in
London, for whom Richardson was printing a book,[3] wrote the first. The
second probably came from William Webster, clergyman and editor of _The
Weekly Miscellany_, wherein the letter had appeared as an advertisement,
the first public reference to _Pamela_, on October 11, 1740.[4] Webster
owed (an obligation eventually forgiven) “a debt of 140 _l._ to my most
worthy Friend, Mr. _Richardson_, the _Printer_,”[5] and Richardson
reprints the letter using Webster’s phrase: “To my worthy Friend, the
Editor of _Pamela_.” These first two letters, de Freval’s and Webster’s,
respond to an author’s request for criticism. The rest, new with the
second edition, are unsolicited.

All of these are the work of Aaron Hill, excepting only the anonymous
letter which Richardson summarizes, beginning on page xxi[6] -- sent to
Richardson in care of Charles Rivington, co-publisher of _Pamela_, on
November 15, 1740, the first gratuitous response to Richardson’s book.
To advertisements in _The Daily Gazeteer_ (November 20) and _The London
Evening-Post_ (December 11-13), Richardson added a note:

  An anonymous Letter relating to this Piece is come to the Editor’s
  Hand, who takes this Opportunity (having no better) most heartily to
  thank the Gentleman for his candid and judicious Observations; and
  to beg Favour of a further Correspondence with him, under what
  Restrictions he pleases. Instruction, and not Curiosity, being
  sincerely the Motive for this request.[7]

If the gentleman had answered, the introduction to _Pamela_ would
perhaps have been shorter. Some of Hill’s acerbity may have been
absorbed from Richardson, hurt by the writer’s silence.

The double-entendres mentioned on page xxii are given in the gentleman’s
unpublished letter in the Forster collection, in the Victoria and Albert
Museum:

  Jokes are often more Severe, and do more Mischief, than more Solid
  Objects -- to obviate some, why not omit P 175 -- _betwixt Fear and
  Delight_ -- and P 181 -- _I made shift to eat a bit of_ etc. _but I
  had no Appetite to any thing else_.[8]

In the light of this letter, the second edition of _Pamela_ attests a
curious fact: while Hill pontificates in the introduction about ignoring
such vulgarity of mind, Richardson has tiptoed back to Volume Two and
changed the questioned passages. From the second edition forward, Pamela
trembles during her wedding not “betwixt Fear and Delight” but “betwixt
Fear and Joy”; and although Richardson leaves Pamela her shift on page
181, he changes her remark about appetite: “I made shift to get down a
bit of Apple-pie, and a little Custard; but that was all.” By omitting
the specific objections from his summary, Richardson managed at one
stroke to save his righteousness in the introduction and his face in the
text.

Hill’s authorship of the introductory letters is easily established.
Anna Laetitia Barbauld includes Hill’s signature with a reduced version
of the one which here begins on page xvi (December 17, 1740).[9]
Thereafter, Richardson’s italicized remarks, two of them added in later
editions, provide the links: “_Abstract of a second Letter from the same
Gentleman_,” etc.

With wonderful indirection, Richardson had sent a copy of _Pamela_ to
Hill’s daughters, along with some other books, and, as Hill writes
Mallet, “without the smallest _hint_, that it was _his_, and with a
grave apology, as for a _trifle_, of too light a species.”[10] Hill
thanked Richardson in the letter of December 17, 1740. Hill asks who on
earth the author might be, hinting, the while, by returning Richardson’s
own phrase, that he understands that it is Richardson himself: “this
_Trifle_ (for such, I dare answer for the _Author_, His Modesty
misguides him to think it).” Though Hill tells Mallet that Richardson
was “very loth ... a long time, to confess it,” Richardson did not dally
long. By December 29, 1740, he has confirmed Hill’s guess. On that date
Hill writes:

  Acquainted with the amiable goodness of your heart, I can foresee
  the pleasure it will give you, to have given another pleasure: and
  you heap it on me in the noblest manner, by the joy you make me
  feel, at finding _Pamela’s_ incomparable author is the person I not
  only hop’d to hear was so, but whom I should have been quite
  griev’d, disturb’d, and mortified, not to have really found so.

  Yet, I confess, till I began to read, I had not the least notion of
  it. But I presently took notice, that whatever _Pamela_ thought,
  said, or did, was all transfusion of your own fine spirit. And as I
  know not if there lives another writer, who could furnish her with
  such a sapid sweetness as she fills the table with, I could not
  therefor chuse but name _you_ to my hope, as moulder of this maiden
  model.[11]

Mrs. Barbauld omits this letter but prints another from Hill to
Richardson, not to be found now in the Forster collection, bearing the
same date -- December 29, 1740 (I, 56ff.). This letter furnishes the
“_delightful Story, so admirably related_” beginning on page xxxi. From
the second paragraph on (“We have a lively little Boy in the Family”),
the _Pamela_ text is substantially the same as Barbauld’s. But the first
paragraph Richardson has contrived to suit his editorial fiction.

The delightful story so gratified Mr. Richardson that he sent lively
little Harry Campbell (“the dear amiable boy”) two books, an event
almost enough to finish him:

  Out burst a hundred _O Lords!_ in a torrent of voice rendered hoarse
  and half choaked by his passions. He clasped his trembling fingers
  together; and his hands were strained hard, and held writhing. His
  elbows were extended to the height of his shoulders, and his eyes,
  all inflamed with delight, turned incessantly round from one side,
  and one friend, to the other, scattering his triumphant ideas among
  us. His fairy-face (ears and all) was flushed as red as his lips;
  and his flying feet told his joy to the floor, in a wild and
  stamping impatience of gratitude.[12]

The only other part of the introduction to _Pamela_ elsewhere in print
is the concluding poem. This, too, is Hill’s, printed in _The Weekly
Miscellany_, February 28, 1741, along with his December 17 letter, and
collected with Hill’s _Works_ (III, 348-350). This is the poem, it would
seem, of which Hill boasts that he has given “Pamela” a short “e” as
Richardson intended, asserting that “Mr. Pope has taught half the women
in England to pronounce it wrong.”[13] Pope in his _Epistle to Miss
Blount_ (line 49), had made the “e” long:

  The gods, to curse Pamela with her prayers,
  Gave the gilt coach and dappled Flanders mares,
  The shining robes, rich jewels, beds of state,
  And, to complete her bliss, a fool for mate.

Hill’s lines are somewhat less successful. He dedicated them to “the
Unknown Author of _Pamela_” two months after Richardson had confessed
his authorship.

Richardson changes one line in the poem. In Hill’s _Works_ it reads:
“Whence _public wealth_ derives its vital course.” Richardson, a more
modern man perhaps, reads “_public Health_.” His emendation, however,
improves Hill’s metaphor concerning a blaze which is a pilot pointing
out the source of public wealth, which is drunk to prevent gangrene from
blackening to the bone. Further reflection led Richardson a year later
to change “vital” to “moral.”

Throughout the letters in his introduction, Richardson made changes, all
largely stylistic. That Richardson removed the letters from the front of
his book in response to criticism -- as Cross[14] and others have
asserted -- is not quite accurate. He removed them from the sixth
edition, but put them back in the seventh and eighth; and his
alterations show him giving in to criticism only by inches, if indeed
his changes to his introduction are not more simply those of any author
trimming (and with Richardson, ever so little) his early extravagances.

Richardson’s stubbornness here suggests other reasons for his
substituting a table of contents for his introduction in the sixth
edition. To print both would have been too prolix, even for Richardson;
and it seems that the table of contents, detailing the entire action,
together with the change to big quarto volumes, are Richardson’s efforts
to authenticate _Pamela_ in the face of Chandler’s and Kelly’s
unauthorized sequel, _Pamela’s Conduct in High Life_, printed to
complete the two duodecimo volumes of Richardson’s original story.
Richardson’s sixth edition is the first in which his own additional two
volumes, written to forestall Chandler and Kelly, are included with the
first two as a complete four-volume unit. Twelve years later, in 1754,
his true _Pamela_ established, he reverted to his introductory letters.
Hill’s death in 1750 may also have moved Richardson to restore the
introduction which was chiefly Hill’s work, recalling both his friend
and _Pamela’s_ greener days. In the eighth edition, at the end of his
life, Richardson still kept the introductory letters, though with some
final constrictions.

Richardson makes the first changes to his introduction in the fourth
edition. Excepting minor clarifications, all deal with Hill’s answer to
the anonymous gentleman. The attitude toward this gentleman has
softened. The “rashest of All his Advices” becomes merely the “least
weigh’d” of his judgments, and his blindness becomes oversight. He is no
longer pedantic; he no longer makes vulgar allusions, but only fears
that they might be made.

In the fifth edition, Richardson seems chiefly concerned with
redundancy, but he also diminishes some of the praise. In deference to
the gentleman, it would seem, Richardson deletes his flattery of Hill on
pages xxix and xxxi, and “_some of the most beautiful Letters that have
been written in any Language_” become simply “_Letters_.” Perhaps
Richardson’s conscience was bothering him. Perhaps he had heard from his
anonymous correspondent after all: he now identifies the gentleman’s
remarks as coming “_in a Letter from the Country_.” Unless pure fancy,
this is new information, for the letter, now in the Forster collection,
in no way indicates its place of origin. Richardson’s seeking of the
gentleman through advertisement in London newspapers suggests that he
thought of his correspondent as a city man.

In the fifth edition one detects a certain discomfort with the false
editorship and the praise Richardson permits himself with it. His direct
response to criticism is slight. He deletes “_from_ low _to_ high
_Life_,” since _Pamela’s Conduct in High Life_ had appeared four months
previous. From the passages which Fielding ridicules in _Shamela_, he
drops no more than “wonderful” from before “AUTHOR of _Pamela_.” In the
passage introducing the new letters (page xv) Richardson now apologizes.
The Author, he implies, wanted the praises omitted, but much to his
sorrow the Editor could not disentangle them from the “critical
remarks.” The author’s modesty, however, remains in the realm of
possibility only.

Where self-praise is strong a vague uneasiness sets Richardson to work
on the style, unable to locate the center of his trouble. On page v
“_strongly interest them in the edifying Story_” becomes “_attach their
regard to the Story,_” but this is barely to nibble at his phrase “_so
probable, so natural, so lively_” just preceding, which perished in the
eighth edition.

Similarly, he attempts to cure the last paragraph of his preface through
minor incisions. He drops the parenthesis about the “_great Variety of
entertaining Incidents_”, and he diminishes “_these engaging Scenes_” to
“_it_”. But the paragraph is still too much for him. In the eighth
edition he cuts all but the outlines of his editor-author pretext.

The seventh edition does no more than sharpen punctuation. The eighth in
general continues to trim little excesses, though the loss is scarcely
noticeable. Richardson further reduces Hill’s praise of the book and his
own praise of Hill, feeling his way toward a detached view of his book,
looking to posterity. Since _Pamela_ has fulfilled the prediction of
foreign renown made by his French friend, de Freval, Richardson now
omits de Freval’s obliging treachery to the literature of France (page
ix). Since the “delightful story” is anecdotal and not critical, it too
disappears. Other changes simply testify an author’s attention to his
style, uninhibited by the fact that the style is indeed not his. He
deletes a senseless remark about masculine flexibility. He removes
“Nature” from the foundation of the narrative (title page and page v,
though left on page viii) probably to avoid implying that Nature is in
the foundation only.

From the first, Richardson’s disguise as editor is little more than
half-hearted. Its purpose was at first partly commercial, permitting
advertising in the preface. Four ladies urged him on, so, Richardson
confesses, he “struck a bold stroke in the preface... having the umbrage
of the editor’s character to screen [him] self behind.”[15] But the
author nevertheless threw rather distinct shadows on the screen. His
preface speaks of the book altogether as a work of fiction: the editor
has “set forth” social duties; he has “painted” vice and virtue, “drawn”
characters, “raised,” “taught,” “effected,” and “embellished with a
great variety of entertaining incidents.” Yet, suddenly, the editor also
seems to have done nothing more than to have “perused these engaging
scenes,” written a preface, and gotten them into print.

Richardson cannot quite give the imaginary author substance. “These
sheets” have accomplished all the wonders claimed for them, not “the
author of these sheets.” Richardson speaks not of _the_ author, but of
_an_ author, of authors in general. The implication hangs over the
preface, and is strengthened by de Freval’s letter, that the editor
himself has worked up the story from the barest details of real life
(which is, of course, what Richardson did). De Freval continues to speak
of the work entirely as of creative writing. The epistolary style is
aptly devised; the book will become a pattern for this kind of fiction;
it is contrived for readers of all tastes. But, quite in contradiction,
de Freval also implies that the editor has shown him the author’s
original work, together with certain editorial changes necessary to
protect the real Pamela and Mr. B.

The second letter, presumably Webster’s, toys with the suggestion that a
young woman actually wrote the letters which Richardson edits: “let us
have _Pamela_ as _Pamela_ wrote it.” But this is only in play. Although
the writer disparages “_Novels_,” the note which heads his letter when
it first appeared in _The Weekly Miscellany_ speaks of the “Author of
Pamela” who has “written an _English Novel_,”[16] and his opening
remarks are clearly those of a critic speaking of fiction.

Hill’s first letter goes solidly for the conclusion that an author,
a man of genius, wrote the book. The heading, “To the Editor of
_Pamela_”, is Richardson’s only attempt to bring Hill’s letter into his
already wavering line. In the fifth edition, however, he introduces this
letter with his only straight statement that an author, distinct from
the editor, is involved, an author who begged the editor not to include
flattery.

To the end of his days Richardson continued to sit under the editorial
shade -- _Sir Charles Grandison_ was “published” by the “editor of
_Pamela_ and _Clarissa_” -- enjoying the sunshine of his authorship.
His introduction to _Pamela_ and the care he took with it suggest more
succinctly than anything else Richardson’s flirtation with his adorers,
which is not at all unlike that of his so modest heroine.

  Sheridan W. Baker, Jr.
  University of Michigan


    [Footnote 1: William M. Sale, _Samuel Richardson,
    a Bibliographical Record_ (New Haven, 1936), p. 13.]

    [Footnote 2: The fourth carries “the Second Edition” before the
    new introductory letters; the fifth changes to “the Present
    Edition.”]

    [Footnote 3: A translation of Abbé Noel Antoine Pluche: _The
    History of the Heavens_, 2 vols. (1740). (William M. Sale, _Samuel
    Richardson: Master Printer_ [Cornell, 1950], p. 193.)]

    [Footnote 4: William M. Sale, _Samuel Richardson,
    a Bibliographical Record_, p. 15; William M. and Alan D. McKillop,
    _Samuel Richardson_ (Chapel Hill, 1936), p. 42.]

    [Footnote 5: McKillop, pp. 301-2. Richardson had printed the
    _Miscellany_ between 1733 and 1736.]

    [Footnote 6: Richardson mentions other letters but does not print
    them. Hill’s reference to “The Gentleman’s Advice” on page xxii is
    to a letter from Benjamin Slocock, who commended _Pamela_ from his
    pulpit in St. Saviour’s, and thus helped provoke Henry Fielding.
    (Sale, ibid., p. 17.)]

    [Footnote 7: McKillop, p. 49.]

    [Footnote 8: For this and other information concerning the Forster
    collection of Richardson’s correspondence, I am indebted to Mr.
    Arthur Wheen, Keeper of the Library, Victoria and Albert Museum,
    London.]

    [Footnote 9: _The Correspondence of Samuel Richardson_ (London,
    1804), I, 53-55.]

    [Footnote 10: _The Works of the Late Aaron Hill, Esq._ (London,
    1753), II, 221. Letter dated January 23, 1741.]

    [Footnote 11: Hill, _Works_ II, 292.]

    [Footnote 12: Barbauld, I, 63-64.]

    [Footnote 13: Barbauld, I, lxxviii.]

    [Footnote 14: _The History of Henry Fielding_, I, 313.]

    [Footnote 15: Barbauld, I, lxxvi.]

    [Footnote 16: McKillop, p. 42.]


CHANGES

1. ... _here; and writes with the more Assurance of Success, as an
_Editor_ may be allowed to judge with more Impartiality than is often to
be found in an _Author_._

2. _But Difficulties having arisen from different Opinions, some
applauding the very Things that others found Fault with, we have found
it necessary to insert the _Praises_ in the following Letters, with the
critical Remarks; because the Writer has so kindly mix’d them, that they
cannot be disjoin’d (however earnestly the Author of the Piece desire’d
it) without obscuring, and indeed defacing, all the Spirit of the
Reasoning._

3. _The following Objections to some Passages in Pamela were made by an
anonymous Gentleman, in a Letter from the Country._

4. _The ingenious Writer of the two preceding Letters, answers these
good natured Objections, as follows:_

5. Fourth: “least weigh’d”; fifth: “least considered.”

6. ...it seems plain to me, that this Gentleman, however laudable his
Intention may be on the whole, discerns not an Elegance,...

7. In the Occasions this Gentleman, in his Postscript, is pleas’d to
discover for _Jokes_, I either find not, that he has any Signification
at all, or, causelessly, as I think, apprehends that such coarse-tasted
Allusions to loose low-life Idioms, may be made, that _not_ to
understand what is meant by them, is both the cleanliest, and prudentest
Way of confuting them.

8. ...in the Mind of the Reader, an Honesty so sincere and unguarded.

9. Deleted, fifth edition; replaced in eighth with: “_In a Third Letter
the same benevolent Gentleman writes, as follows:_”.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


                   _PAMELA_:

                      OR,

                VIRTUE Rewarded.

                 In a SERIES of

                FAMILIAR LETTERS

                     FROM A

            Beautiful Young DAMSEL,

                To her PARENTS.

              Now first Published

In order to cultivate the Principles of VIRTUE
  and RELIGION in the Minds of the YOUTH of
  BOTH SEXES.

A Narrative which has its Foundation in TRUTH
  [_del._ 8th] {and NATURE}; and at the same time that it
  agreeably entertains, by a Variety of _curious_ and
  _affecting_ INCIDENTS, is intirely divested of all those
  Images, which, in too many Pieces calculated for Amusement
  only, tend to _inflame_ the Minds they should _instruct_.


  In TWO VOLUMES.

  The SECOND EDITION.

  To which are prefixed, EXTRACTS from several curious
    LETTERS written to the _Editor_ on the Subject.

  VOL. I.

    _LONDON:_

  Printed for C. RIVINGTON, in _St. Paul’s Church-Yard_;
    and J. OSBORN, in _Pater-noster Row_.

    M DCC XLI.




  PREFACE

  by the

  EDITOR.


IF to _Divert_ and _Entertain_, and at the same time to _Instruct_, and
_Improve_ the Minds of the _YOUTH_ of _both Sexes_:

IF to inculcate _Religion_ and _Morality_ in so easy and agreeable a
manner, as shall render them equally _delightful_ and _profitable_
[_del._ 5th] {to the _younger Class_ of Readers, as well as worthy of
the Attention of Persons of _maturer_ Years and Understandings}:

IF to set forth in the most exemplary Lights, the _Parental_, the
_Filial_, and the _Social_ Duties, [_del._ 5th] {and that from _low_ to
_high_ Life}:

IF to paint _VICE_ in its proper Colours, to make it _deservedly
Odious_; and to set _VIRTUE_ in its own amiable Light, to make it truly
_Lovely_:

IF to draw Characters _justly_, and to support them _equally_:

IF to raise a Distress from _natural_ Causes, and to excite Compassion
from _proper_ Motives:

IF to teach the Man of _Fortune_ how to use it; the Man of _Passion_ how
to subdue it; and the Man of _Intrigue_, how, gracefully, and with
Honour to himself, to _reclaim_:

IF to give _practical_ Examples, worthy to be followed in the most
_critical_ and _affecting_ Cases, by the [_del._ 5th] {modest} _Virgin_,
the [_del._ 5th] {chaste} _Bride_, and the [_del._ 5th] {obliging}
_Wife_:

IF to effect all these good Ends, [_del._ 8th] {in so probable, so
natural, so _lively_ a manner, as shall engage the Passions of every
sensible Reader, and strongly interest them in the edifying Story:

AND all} without raising a single _Idea_ throughout the Whole, that
shall shock the exactest Purity, even in those tender Instances where
the exactest Purity would be most apprehensive:

IF these [_del._ 5th] {, (embellished with a great Variety of
entertaining Incidents)} be laudable or worthy Recommendations of any
Work, the Editor of the following Letters, which have their Foundation
in _Truth_ [_del._ 8th] {and _Nature_}, ventures to assert, that all
these desirable Ends are obtained [8th, change 1.] {in these Sheets: And
as he is therefore confident of the favourable Reception which he boldly
bespeaks for this little Work; he thinks any _further Preface_ or
_Apology_ for it, unnecessary: And the rather for two Reasons, 1st.
Because he can Appeal from _his own_ Passions, (which have been
uncommonly _moved_ in perusing these engaging Scenes) to the Passions of
_Every one_ who shall read them with the least Attention: And, in the
next place, because an _Editor_ may reasonably be supposed to judge with
an Impartiality which is rarely to be met with in an _Author_ towards
his own Works.}

  The Editor.




To the Editor of the Piece intitled, PAMELA; or, _VIRTUE Rewarded_.


_Dear SIR,_

I have had inexpressible Pleasure in the Perusal of your PAMELA. It
intirely answers the Character you give of it in your Preface; nor have
you said one Word too much in Commendation of a Piece that has
Advantages and Excellencies peculiar to itself. For, besides the
beautiful Simplicity of the Style, and a happy Propriety and Clearness
of Expression (the Letters being written under the immediate Impression
of every Circumstance which occasioned them, and that to those who had a
Right to know the fair Writer’s most secret Thoughts) the several
Passions of the Mind must, of course, be more affectingly described, and
Nature may be traced in her undisguised Inclinations with much more
Propriety and Exactness, than can possibly be found in a Detail of
Actions long past, which are never recollected with the same Affections,
Hopes, and Dreads, with which they were felt when they occurred.

This little Book will infallibly be looked upon as the hitherto
much-wanted Standard or Pattern for this Kind of Writing. For it abounds
with lively Images and Pictures; with Incidents natural, surprising, and
perfectly adapted to the Story; with Circumstances interesting to
Persons in common Life, as well as to those in exalted Stations. The
greatest Regard is every where paid in it to Decency, and to every Duty
of Life: There is a constant Fitness of the Style to the Persons and
Characters described; Pleasure and Instruction here always go hand in
hand: Vice and Virtue are set in constant Opposition, and Religion
every-where inculcated in its native Beauty and chearful Amiableness;
not dressed up in stiff, melancholy, or gloomy Forms, on one hand, nor
yet, on the other, debased below its due Dignity and noble Requisites,
in Compliment to a too fashionable but depraved Taste. And this I will
boldly say, that if its numerous Beauties are added to its excellent
Tendency, it will be found worthy a Place, not only in all Families
(especially such as have in them young Persons of either Sex) but in the
Collections of the most curious and polite Readers. For, as it borrows
none of its Excellencies from the romantic Flights of unnatural Fancy,
its being founded in Truth and Nature, and built upon Experience, will
be a lasting Recommendation to the Discerning and Judicious; while the
agreeable Variety of Occurrences and Characters, in which it abounds,
will not fail to engage the Attention of the gay and more sprightly
Readers.

The moral Reflections and Uses to be drawn from the several Parts of
this admirable History, are so happily deduced from a Croud of different
Events and Characters, in the Conclusion of the Work, that I shall say
the less on that Head. But I think, the Hints you have given me, should
also prefatorily be given to the Publick; _viz._ That it will appear
from several Things mentioned in the Letters, that the Story must have
happened within these Thirty Years past: That you have been obliged to
vary some of the Names of Persons, Places, _&c._ and to disguise a few
of the Circumstances, in order to avoid giving Offence to some Persons,
who would not chuse to be pointed out too plainly in it; tho’ they would
be glad it may do the Good so laudably intended by the Publication. And
as you have in Confidence submitted to my Opinion some of those
Variations, I am much pleased that you have so managed the Matter, as to
make no Alteration in the Facts; and, at the same time, have avoided the
digressive Prolixity too frequently used on such Occasions.


Little Book, charming PAMELA! face the World, and never doubt of finding
Friends and Admirers, not only in thine own Country, but far from Home;
[_del._ 8th] {where thou mayst give an Example of Purity to the Writers
of a neighbouring Nation; which now shall have an Opportunity to receive
_English_ Bullion in Exchange for its own Dross, which has so long
passed current among us in Pieces abounding with all the Levities of its
volatile Inhabitants.} The reigning Depravity of the Times has yet left
Virtue many Votaries. Of their Protection you need not despair. May
every head-strong Libertine whose Hands you reach, be reclaimed; and
every tempted Virgin who reads you, imitate the Virtue, and meet the
Reward of the high-meriting, tho’ low-descended, PAMELA. I am, Sir,

  _Your most Obedient,
    and Faithful Servant,_

      J. B. D. F.




_To my worthy Friend, the Editor of PAMELA._

_SIR_,

I return the Manuscript of _Pamela_ by the Bearer, which I have read
with a great deal of Pleasure. It is written with that Spirit of Truth
and agreeable Simplicity, which, tho’ much wanted, is seldom found in
those Pieces which are calculated for the Entertainment and Instruction
of the Publick. It carries Conviction in every Part of it; and the
Incidents are so natural and interesting, that I have gone hand-in-hand,
and sympathiz’d with the pretty Heroine in all her Sufferings, and been
extremely anxious for her Safety, under the Apprehensions of the bad
Consequences which I expected, every Page, would ensue from the laudable
Resistance she made. I have interested myself in all her Schemes of
Escape; been alternately pleas’d and angry with her in her Restraint;
_pleas’d_ with the little Machinations and Contrivances she set on foot
for her Release, and _angry_ for suffering her Fears to defeat them;
always lamenting, with a most sensible Concern, the Miscarriages of her
Hopes and Projects. In short, the whole is so affecting, that there is
no reading it without uncommon Concern and Emotion. Thus far only as to
the _Entertainment_ it gives.

As to _Instruction_ and _Morality_, the Piece is full of both. It shews
Virtue in the strongest Light, and renders the Practice of it amiable
and lovely. The beautiful Sufferer keeps it ever in her View, without
the least Ostentation, or Pride; she has it so strongly implanted in
her, that thro’ the whole Course of her Sufferings, she does not so much
as hesitate once, whether she shall sacrifice it to Liberty and
Ambition, or not; but, as if there were no other way to free and save
herself, carries on a determin’d Purpose to persevere in her Innocence,
and wade with it throughout all Difficulties and Temptations, or perish
under them. [_del._ 8th] {It is an astonishing Matter, and well worth
our most serious Consideration, that a young beautiful Girl, in the low
Scene of Life and Circumstance in which Fortune placed her, without the
Advantage of a Friend capable to relieve and protect her, or any other
Education than what occurr’d to her from her own Observation and little
Reading, in the Course of her Attendance on her excellent Mistress and
Benefactress, could, after having a Taste of Ease and Plenty in a higher
Sphere of Life than what she was born and first brought up in, resolve
to return to her primitive Poverty, rather than give up her Innocence.}
I say, it is surprising, that a young Person, so circumstanced, could,
in Contempt of proffer’d Grandeur on the one side, and in Defiance of
Penury on the other, so happily and prudently conduct herself thro’ such
a Series of Perplexities and Troubles, and withstand the alluring Baits,
and almost irresistible Offers of a fine Gentleman, so universally
admired and esteemed, for the Agreeableness of his Person and good
Qualities, among all his Acquaintance; defeat all his Measures with so
much Address, and oblige him, at last, to give over his vain Pursuit,
and sacrifice his Pride and Ambition to Virtue, and become the Protector
of that Innocence which he so long and so indefatigably labour’d to
supplant: And all this without ever having entertain’d the least
previous Design or Thought for that Purpose: No Art used to inflame him,
no Coquetry practised to tempt or intice him, and no Prudery or
Affectation to tamper with his Passions; but, on the contrary, artless
and unpractised in the Wiles of the World, all her Endeavours, and even
all her Wishes, tended only to render herself as un-amiable as she could
in his Eyes: Tho’ at the same time she is so far from having any
Aversion to his Person, that she seems rather prepossess’d in his
Favour, and admires his Excellencies, whilst she condemns his Passion
for her. A glorious Instance of Self-denial! Thus her very Repulses
became Attractions: The more she resisted, the more she charm’d; and the
very Means she used to guard her Virtue, the more endanger’d it, by
inflaming his Passions: Till, at last, by Perseverance, and a brave and
resolute Defence, the Besieged not only obtain’d a glorious Victory over
the Besieger, but took him Prisoner too.

I am charmed with the beautiful Reflections she makes in the Course of
her Distresses; her Soliloquies and little Reasonings with herself, are
exceeding pretty and entertaining: She pours out all her Soul in them
before her Parents without Disguise; so that one may judge of, nay,
almost see, the inmost Recesses of her Mind. A pure clear Fountain of
Truth and Innocence; a Magazine of Virtue and unblemish’d Thoughts!

I can’t conceive why you should hesitate a Moment as to the Publication
of this very natural and uncommon Piece. I could wish to see it out in
its own native Simplicity, which will affect and please the Reader
beyond all the Strokes of Oratory in the World; for those will but spoil
it: and, should you permit such a murdering Hand to be laid upon it, to
gloss and tinge it over with superfluous and needless Decorations,
which, like too much Drapery in Sculpture and Statuary, will but
encumber it; it may disguise the Facts, mar the Reflections, and
unnaturalize the Incidents, so as to be lost in a Multiplicity of fine
idle Words and Phrases, and reduce our Sterling Substance into an empty
Shadow, or rather _frenchify_ our _English_ Solidity into Froth and
Whip-syllabub. No; let us have _Pamela_ as _Pamela_ wrote it; in her own
Words, without Amputation, or Addition. Produce her to us in her neat
Country Apparel, such as she appear’d in, on her intended Departure to
her Parents; for such best becomes her Innocence, and beautiful
Simplicity. Such a Dress will best edify and entertain. The flowing
Robes of Oratory may indeed amuse and amaze, but will never strike the
Mind with solid Attention.

In short, Sir, a Piece of this Kind is much wanted in the World, which
is but too much, as well as too early, debauched by pernicious _Novels_.
I know nothing Entertaining of that Kind that one might venture to
recommend to the Perusal (much less the Imitation) of the Youth of
either Sex: All that I have hitherto read, tends only to corrupt their
Principles, mislead their Judgments, and initiate them into Gallantry,
and loose Pleasures.

Publish then, this good, this edifying and instructive little Piece for
their sakes. The Honour of _Pamela_’s Sex demands _Pamela_ at your
Hands, to shew the World an Heroine, almost beyond Example, in an
unusual Scene of Life, whom no Temptations, or Sufferings, could subdue.
It is a fine, and glorious Original, for the Fair to copy out and
imitate. Our own Sex, too, require it of you, to free us, in some
measure, from the Imputation of being incapable of the Impressions of
Virtue and Honour; [_del._ 8th] {and to shew the Ladies, that we are not
inflexible while they are so.}

In short, the Cause of Virtue calls for the Publication of such a Piece
as this. Oblige then, Sir, the concurrent Voices of both Sexes, and give
us _Pamela_ for the Benefit of Mankind: [_del._ 8th] {And as I believe
its Excellencies cannot be long unknown to the World, and that there
will not be a Family without it; so I make no Doubt but every Family
that has it, will be much improv’d and better’d by it.} ’Twill form the
tender Minds of _Youth_ for the Reception and Practice of Virtue and
Honour; confirm and establish those of _maturer Years_ on good and
steady Principles; reclaim the Vicious, and mend the Age in general;
insomuch that as I doubt not _Pamela_ will become the bright Example and
Imitation of all the fashionable young Ladies of _Great Britain_; so the
truly generous Benefactor and Rewarder of her exemplary Virtue, will be
no less admired and imitated among the _Beau Monde_ of our own Sex. I am

  _Your affectionate Friend, &c._




INTRODUCTION

TO THIS

SECOND EDITION.


_The kind Reception which this Piece has met with from the Publick,
[_del._ 4th] {(a large Impression having been carried off in less than
Three Months)} deserves not only Acknowlegdment, but that some Notice
should be taken of the Objections that have hitherto come to hand
against a few Passages in it, [_del._ 5th] {that so the Work may be
rendered as unexceptionable as possible, and, of consequence, the fitter
to answer the general Design of it; which is to promote Virtue, and
cultivate the Minds of the Youth of both Sexes.}_

[5th, change 2.] {_But Difficulties having arisen from the different
Opinions of Gentlemen, some of whom applauded the very Things that
others found Fault with, it was thought proper to submit the Whole to
the Judgment of a Gentleman of the most distinguish’d Taste and
Abilities; the Result of which will be seen in the subsequent Pages._}

[_del._ 5th] {_We begin with the following Letter, at the Desire of
several Gentlemen, to whom, on a very particular Occasion, it was
communicated, and who wish’d to see it prefixed to the New Edition. It
was directed,_}


_To the Editor of PAMELA._

_Dear Sir,_

You have agreeably deceiv’d me into a Surprize, which it will be as hard
to express, as the Beauties of PAMELA. Though I open’d this powerful
little Piece with more Expectation than from common Designs, of like
Promise, because it came from _your_ Hands, for my _Daughters_, yet, who
could have dreamt, he should find, under the modest Disguise of a
_Novel_, all the _Soul_ of Religion, Good-breeding, Discretion,
Good-nature, Wit, Fancy, Fine Thought, and Morality?---I have done
nothing but read it to others, and hear others again read it, to me,
ever since it came into my Hands; and I find I am likely to do nothing
else, for I know not how long yet to come: because, if I lay the Book
down, it comes after me.----When it has dwelt all Day long upon the Ear,
It takes Possession, all Night, of the Fancy.----It has Witchcraft in
every Page of it: but it is the Witchcraft of Passion and Meaning. Who
is there that will not despise the false, empty _Pomp_ of the Poets,
when he observes in this little, unpretending, mild Triumph of _Nature_,
the whole Force of Invention and Genius, creating new Powers of Emotion,
and transplanting _Ideas_ of _Pleasure_ into that unweeded low Garden
the _Heart_, from the dry and sharp _Summit_ of _Reason_?

Yet, I confess, there is _One_, in the World, of whom I think with still
greater Respect, than of PAMELA: and That is, of the [_del._ 5th]
{wonderful} AUTHOR of PAMELA.----Pray, Who is he, Dear Sir? and where,
and how, has he been able to hide, hitherto, such an encircling and
all-mastering Spirit? He possesses every Quality that ART could have
charm’d by: yet, has lent it to, and conceal’d it in, NATURE.----The
Comprehensiveness of his Imagination must be truly prodigious!----It has
stretch’d out this diminutive mere _Grain_ of _Mustard-seed_, (a poor
Girl’s little, innocent, Story) into a Resemblance of That _Heaven_,
which the Best of Good Books has compar’d it to.----All the Passions are
His, in their most close and abstracted Recesses: and by selecting the
most delicate, and yet, at the same time, most powerful, of their
Springs, thereby to act, wind, and manage, the Heart, He _moves_ us,
every where, with the Force of a TRAGEDY.

What is there, throughout the _Whole_, that I do not sincerely
admire!---I admire, in it, the strong distinguish’d Variety, and
picturesque glowing Likeness to _Life_, of the Characters. I know, hear,
see, and live among ’em All: and, if I cou’d paint, cou’d return you
their _Faces_. I admire, in it, the noble Simplicity, Force, Aptness,
and Truth, of so many modest, œconomical, moral, prudential, religious,
satirical, and cautionary, _Lessons_; which are introduc’d with such
seasonable Dexterity, and with so polish’d and exquisite a Delicacy, of
Expression and Sentiment, that I am only apprehensive, for the
_Interests_ of _Virtue_, lest some of the _finest_, and _most touching_,
of those elegant Strokes of Good-breeding, Generosity, and Reflection,
shou’d be lost, under the too gross Discernment of an unfeeling Majority
of Readers; for whose Coarseness, however, they were kindly design’d, as
the most useful and charitable Correctives.

One of the best-judg’d Peculiars, of the Plan, is, that These
Instructions being convey’d, as in a Kind of Dramatical Representation,
by those beautiful _Scenes_, Her own Letters and Journals, who acts the
most moving and suffering _Part_, we feel the Force in a threefold
Effect,----from the Motive, the Act, and the Consequence.

But what, above All, I am charm’d with, is the amiable _Good-nature_ of
the AUTHOR; who, I am convinc’d, has one of the best, and most generous
Hearts, of Mankind: because, mis-measuring _other_ Minds, by _His Own_,
he can draw Every thing, to Perfection, but _Wickedness_.----I became
inextricably in _Love_ with this delightful Defect of his Malice;--for,
I found it owing to an _Excess_ in his _Honesty_. Only observe, Sir,
with what _virtuous Reluctance_ he complies with the Demands of his
Story, when he stands in need of some blameable Characters. Tho’ his
Judgment compels him to mark ’em with disagreeable Colourings, so that
they make an odious Appearance at first, He can’t forbear, by an
unexpected and gradual Decline from Themselves, to soften and transmute
all the Horror conceiv’d for their Baseness, till we are arriv’d,
through insensible Stages, at an Inclination to forgive it intirely.

I must venture to add, without mincing the matter, what I really
believe, of this Book.---It will live on, through Posterity, with such
unbounded Extent of Good Consequences, that Twenty Ages to come may be
the Better and Wiser, for its Influence. It will steal first,
imperceptibly, into the Hearts of the _Young_ and the _Tender_: where It
will afterwards guide and moderate their Reflections and Resolves, when
grown Older. And so, a gradual moral Sunshine, of un-austere and
compassionate _Virtue_, shall break out upon the _World_, from this
TRIFLE (for such, I dare answer for the _Author_, His Modesty misguides
him to think it).----No Applause therefore can be too _high_, for _such
Merit_. And, let me abominate the contemptible _Reserves of
mean-spirited Men_, who while they but _hesitate_ their Esteem, with
Restraint, can be fluent and uncheck’d in their _Envy_.----In an Age so
deficient in Goodness, Every such Virtue, as That of this Author, is a
salutary _Angel_, in _Sodom_. And _One_ who cou’d stoop to conceal,
a Delight he receives from the _Worthy_, wou’d be equally capable of
submitting to an Approbation of the _Praise_ of the _Wicked_.

I was thinking, just now, as I return’d from a _Walk_ in the _Snow_, on
that _Old Roman Policy_, of Exemptions in Favour of Men, who had given a
few, bodily, Children to the Republick.----What superior Distinction
ought _our_ Country, to find [_del._ 8th] {(but that Policy and We are
at Variance)} for Reward of this _Father, of Millions of_ MINDS, which
are to owe new Formation to the future Effect of his Influence!

Upon the whole, as I never met with so pleasing, so honest, and so truly
deserving a Book, I shou’d never have done, if I explain’d All my
Reasons for admiring its Author.----If it is not a _Secret_, oblige me
so far as to tell me his _Name_: for since I feel him the _Friend_ of
my Soul, it would be a Kind of Violation to retain him a
_Stranger_.----I am not able to thank you enough, for this highly
acceptable Present. And, as for my Daughters, They have taken into their
Own Hands the Acknowledgment due from their Gratitude. I am,

  DEAR SIR,
  _Your, &c._

  Dec. 17, 1740.


_Abstract of a second Letter from the same Gentleman._

  ---No Sentiments which I have here, or in my last, express’d, of the
  sweet _Pamela_, being more than the bare Truth, which every Man must
  feel, who lends his Ear to the inchanting Prattler, why does the
  Author’s Modesty mislead his Judgment, to suspect the Style wants
  Polishing?---No, Sir, there is an _Ease_, a _natural Air_,
  a dignify’d _Simplicity_, and measured Fullness, in it, that,
  resembling Life, outglows it! He has reconciled the _Pleasing_ to
  the _Proper_. The _Thought_ is every-where exactly _cloath’d_ by the
  _Expression_: And becomes its Dress as roundly, and as close, as
  _Pamela_ her Country-habit. Remember, tho’ she put it on with humble
  Prospect, of descending to the Level of her Purpose, it _adorn’d_
  her, with such unpresum’d _Increase_ of Loveliness; sat with such
  neat Propriety of Elegant Neglect about her, that it threw out All
  her Charms, with tenfold, and resistless Influence.---And so, dear
  Sir, it will be always found.---When modest Beauty seeks to hide
  itself by casting off the _Pride_ of _Ornament_, it but displays
  itself without a _Covering_: And so, becoming more distinguished, by
  its Want of _Drapery_, grows _stronger_, from its _purpos’d
  Weakness_.

[5th, change 3.]

{_There were formed by an anonymous Gentleman, the following Objections
to some Passages in the Work._}

1. That the Style ought to be a little raised, at least so soon as
_Pamela_ knows the Gentleman’s Love is honourable, and when [7th: “her”]
{his} Diffidence is changed to Ease: And from about the fourth Day after
Marriage, it should be equal to the Rank she is rais’d to, [_del._ 4th]
{and charged to fill becomingly}.

2. That to avoid the Idea apt to be join’d with the Word ’_Squire_, the
Gentleman should be styled Sir _James_; or Sir _John_, &c. and Lady
_Davers_ in a new Edition might procure for him the Title of a Baronet.

3. That if the sacred Name were seldomer repeated, it would be better;
for that the Wise Man’s Advice is, _Be not righteous over-much_.

4. That the Penance which _Pamela_ suffers from Lady _Davers_ might be
shorten’d: That she is too timorous after owning her Marriage to that
Lady, and ought to have a little more Spirit, and [_del._ 5th] {get away
sooner out at the Window, or} call her own Servants to protect, and
carry her to her Husband’s Appointment.

5. That Females are too apt to be struck with Images of Beauty; and that
the Passage where the Gentleman is said to span the Waist of _Pamela_
with his Hand, is enough to ruin a Nation of Women by Tight-lacing.

6. That the Word _naughty_ had better be changed to some other, as
_Bad_, _Faulty_, _Wicked_, _Vile_, _Abominable_, _Scandalous_: Which in
most Places would give an Emphasis, for which recourse must otherwise be
had to the innocent Simplicity of the Writer; an Idea not necessary to
the Moral of the Story, nor of Advantage to the Character of the
Heroine.

7. That the Words, _p. 305._ _Foolish Thing that I am_, had better be
_Foolish that I am_. The same Gentleman observes by way of _Postscript_,
that Jokes are often more severe, and do more Mischief, than more solid
Objections; and would have one or two Passages alter’d, to avoid giving
Occasion for the Supposition of a double Entendre, particularly in two
Places which he mentions, _viz._ _p. 175. and 181_.

_He is pleased to take notice of several other Things of less Moment,
some of which are merely typographical; and very kindly expresses, on
the Whole, a high Opinion of the Performance, and thinks it may do a
great deal of Good: For all which, as well as for his Objections, the
Editor gives him very sincere Thanks._

_Others are of Opinion, That the Scenes in many Places, in the Beginning
especially, are too low; and that the Passions of Lady _Davers_, in
particular, are carried too high, and above Nature._

_And others have intimated, That _Pamela_ ought, for Example sake, to
have discharg’d Mrs. _Jewkes_ from her Service._

_These are the most material Objections that have come to hand, all
which are considered in the following [_del._ 5th] {Extracts from some
of the most beautiful} Letters [_del._ 5th] {that have been written in
any Language}:_

[8th adds change 4]

  The Gentleman’s Advice, not to alter _Pamela_ at all, was both
  friendly, and solidly just. I run in, with full Sail, to his
  Anchorage, that the low Scenes are no more out of Nature, than the
  high Passions of proud Lady _Davers_. Out of Nature, do they say?
  ’Tis my Astonishment how Men of Letters can read with such absent
  Attention! They are so far from _Out_ of _Nature_, They are absolute
  _Nature herself_! or, if they must be confess’d her _Resemblance_;
  they are _such_ a Resemblance, at least, as our _true Face_ gives
  our _Face_ in the _Looking-glass_.

  I wonder indeed, what it is, that the Gentlemen, who talk of _Low_
  Scenes, wou’d desire should be understood by the Epithet?---Nothing,
  properly speaking, is _low_, that suits well with the Place it is
  rais’d to.----The Passions of Nature are the same, in the _Lord_,
  and his _Coach-man_. All, that makes them seem different consists in
  the _Degrees_, in the _Means_, and the _Air_, whereto or wherewith
  they indulge ’em. If, in painting Distinctions like these, (which
  arise but from the Forms of Men’s Manners, drawn from _Birth_,
  _Education_, and _Custom_) a Writer _falls short_ of his Characters,
  there his Scene is a low one, indeed, whatever high Fortune it
  flatter’d. But, to imagine that Persons of Rank are above a Concern
  for what is thought, felt, or acted, by others, of their Species,
  between whom and themselves is _no Difference_, except such as was
  owing to Accident, is to reduce Human Nature to a Lowness,--_too
  low_ for the _Truth_ of her _Frailty_.--

  In _Pamela_, in particular, we owe All to her _Lowness_. It is to
  the docile Effects of this Lowness of _that amiable Girl_, in her
  Birth, her Condition, her Hopes, and her Vanities, in every thing,
  in short, but her _Virtue_,---that her Readers are indebted, for the
  moral _Reward_, of that _Virtue_. And if we are to look for the
  _Low_ among the Rest of the Servants, less lovely tho’ they are,
  than a _Pamela_, there is something however, so glowingly painted,
  in the Lines whereby the Author has mark’d their
  Distinctions----Something, so movingly forceful, in the _Grief_ at
  their _Parting_, and _Joy_ at the happy Return,---Something so
  finely, at once, and so strongly and feelingly, _varied_, even in
  the smallest and least promising, little Family Incidents! that I
  need only appeal from the _Heads_, to the _Hearts_ of the Objectors
  themselves, whether these are _low_ Scenes to be censur’d?

  And as for the opposite Extreme they wou’d quarrel with, the
  high-passion’d, and un-tam’d Lady _Davers_,---I cou’d direct ’em to
  a Dozen or two of _Quality Originals_, from whom (with Exception
  perhaps of her _Wit_) one wou’d swear the Author had taken her
  Copy.---What a Sum might these Objectors ensure, to be paid, by the
  _Husbands_ and _Sons_, of such termagant, hermaphrodite Minds, upon
  their making due Proof, that they were no longer to be found, in the
  Kingdom!

  I know, you are too just to imagine me capable of giving any other
  Opinion than my best-weigh’d and true one. But, because it is fit
  you should have _Reasons_, in Support of a Judgment that can neither
  deserve nor expect an implicit Reception, I will run over the
  Anonymous Letter I herewith return you; and note with what Lightness
  even Men of _good-natur’d_ Intention fall into _Mistakes_, by
  Neglect in too hasty Perusals, which their Benevolence wou’d take
  Pleasure in blushing at, when they discover their Weakness, in a
  cooler Revisal.

  The Writer of this Letter is for having the Style _rais’d_, after
  _Pamela_’s Advance in her Fortune. But surely, This was hasty
  Advice: because, as the Letters are writ to her Parents, it wou’d
  have look’d like forgetting, and, in some sort, insulting, the
  Lowliness of their inferior Condition, to have assum’d a new Air in
  her Language, in Place of retaining a steady Humility. But, here, it
  must not be pass’d unobserv’d, that in her Reports of Conversations
  that follow’d her Marriage, she _does_, aptly and beautifully,
  heighten her Style, and her Phrases: still returning however to her
  decent Simplicity, in her Addresses to her Father and Mother.

  I am against giving a Gentleman (who has ennobled himself, by
  reforming his Vices, and rewarding the Worth of the _Friendless_)
  the unnecessary new Toy of a _Title_. It is all strong in Nature, as
  it stands in the Letters: and I don’t see how Greatness, from
  Titles, can add Likeness or Power, to the Passions. So complete a
  Resemblance of _Truth_ stands in need of no borrow’d Pretensions.

  The Only of this Writer’s Objections, which, I think, carries
  Weight, is That, which advises some little _Contraction_ of the
  Prayers, and Appeals to the Deity. I say _little_ Contraction: for
  they are nobly and sincerely pathetic. And I say it only in Fear,
  lest, if fansied too long, by the fashionably _Averse_ to the
  Subject, Minds, which most want the _purpos’d Impression_, might
  hazard the _Loss_ of its _Benefit_, by passing over those pious
  Reflections, which, if shorter, would catch their Attention.

  Certainly, the Gentleman’s Objection against the Persecution that
  _Pamela_ suffers from lady _Davers_, in respect to the Relation this
  Madwoman bears to the _Brother_, is the [4th & 5th, change 5.]
  {rashest} of All his Advices! And when he thinks she ought rather to
  have assum’d the Protection of her Servants, he seems unaware of the
  probable _Consequence_; where there was a Puppy, of Quality, in the
  Case, who had, even without Provocation, drawn his Sword on the poor
  passive PAMELA. Far from bearing a Thought of exciting an abler
  Resentment, to the Danger of a Quarrel with so worthless a Coxcomb,
  how charmingly natural, apprehensive, and generous, is her Silence
  (during the Recital she makes of her Sufferings) with regard to this
  _masculine_ Part of the Insult! as also her Prevention of Mrs.
  _Jewkes_’s less delicate Bluntness, when she was beginning to
  complain of the whelp Lord’s Impertinence!

  If I were not afraid of a _Pun_, I shou’d tell the anonymous
  Letter-writer, that he made a too _tight-laced_ Objection, where he
  quarrels with the spann’d Waist of _Pamela_. What, in the Name of
  Unshapeliness! cou’d he find, to complain of, in a beautiful Girl of
  Sixteen, who was born _out of Germany_, and had not, yet, reach’d
  ungraspable _Roundness_!----These are wonderful Sinkings from
  Purpose, where a Man is considering such mental, and passionate
  Beauties, as this Gentleman profess’d to be touch’d by!

  But, when he goes on, to object against the Word _naughty_, (as
  apply’d in the Phrase _naughty Master_) [4th, change 6.] {I grow
  mortified, in Fear for our human Sufficiency, compar’d with our
  Aptness to blunder! For, here, ’tis plain, this Director of
  Another’s Discernment is quite blind, Himself, to an Elegance,} one
  wou’d have thought it _impossible_ not to be struck by?---Faulty,
  wicked, abominable, scandalous, (which are the angry Adjectives, he
  prefers to that sweet one) wou’d have carried Marks of her Rage, not
  Affliction--whereas _naughty_ contains, in One single significant
  Petulance, [5th: “a Variety of”] {twenty thousand} inexpressible
  Delicacies!---It insinuates, at once, all the beautiful Struggle,
  between her Contempt of his Purpose, and tender Regard for his
  Person; her Gratitude to Himself and his Family; her Recollection of
  his superior Condition.--There is in the elegant Choice of this
  half-kind, half-peevish, _Word_, a never-enough to be prais’d
  speaking Picture of the Conflict betwixt her Disdain, and her
  Reverence! [_del._ 4th] {See, Sir, the Reason I had, for
  apprehending some Danger that the refin’d Generosity in many of the
  most charming of the Sentiments wou’d be _lost_, upon the too coarse
  Conception of some, for whose Use the Author intended them.}

  It is the same Case again, in _foolish Thing that I am!_ which this
  nice, [_del._ 4th] {un-nice,} Gentleman wou’d advise you to change,
  into _foolish that I am!_ He does not seem to have tasted the pretty
  Contempt of Herself, the submissive _Diminutive_, so distant from
  Vanity, yet allayed by the gentle Reluctance in Self-condemnation
  [_del._ 4th] {;---and the other fine Touches of Nature: which wou’d
  All have been lost, in the grave, sober Sound of his _Dutch
  Emendation_.}

  [_del._ 4th]

  {As to his Paragraph in _Postscript_, I shall say the less of it,
  because the Gentleman’s own good Sense seems to confess, by the
  Place he has chosen to rank it in, that it ought to be turn’d out of
  Doors, as too _dirty_ for the rest of his Letter.----} [4th,
  change 7.] In the Occasions {he} is pleas’d to discover for _Jokes_,
  I either find not, that he has any Signification at all, or {such
  vulgar,} coarse-tasted Allusions to loose low-life Idioms, [_ins._]
  that _not_ to understand what {he means,} is both the cleanliest,
  and prudentest Way of confuting {him}.

  And now, Sir, you will easily gather how far I am from thinking it
  needful to change any thing in _Pamela_. I would not scratch such a
  beautiful Face, for the _Indies_!

  [_del._ 8th]

  {You can hardly imagine how it charms me to hear of a Second Edition
  already! but the News of still new upon new ones, will be found no
  Subject of Wonder. As ’tis sure, that no Family is without Sisters,
  or Brothers, or Daughters, or Sons, who can _read_; or wants
  Fathers, or Mothers, or Friends, who can _think_; so equally certain
  it is, that the Train to a Parcel of Powder does not run on with
  more natural Tendency, till it sets the whole Heap in a Blaze, than
  that _Pamela_, inchanting from Family to Family, will overspread all
  the Hearts of the Kingdom.}

  As to the Objection of those warm Friends to _Honesty_, who are for
  having _Pamela_ dismiss Mrs. _Jewkes_; there is not One, among All
  these benevolent Complainers, who wou’d not discern himself to have
  been, _laudably_, in the _wrong_, were he only to be ask’d this
  plain Question---Whether a Step, both ill-judg’d, and undutiful, had
  not been the Reverse of a PAMELA’s Character?---Two or three times
  over, Mr. _B----_ had inform’d her, that Mrs. _Jewkes_ and Himself
  having been equally involv’d in _One Guilt_, she must forgive, or
  condemn, _Both together_. After this, it grew manifest _Duty_ not to
  treat her with Marks of Resentment.---And, as here was a visible
  Necessity to appear not desirous of turning her away, so, in point
  of mere _Moral_ Regard to the bad Woman Herself, it was nobler, to
  retain her, with a Prospect of correcting, in Time, her loose Habit
  of thinking, than, by casting her off, to the licentious Results of
  her Temper, abandon her to Temptations and Danger, which a Virtue
  like PAMELA’s cou’d not wish her expos’d to.

[_del._ 5th]

{_The Manner in which this admirable Gentleman gives his Opinion of the
Piece, and runs thro’ the principal Characters, is so masterly, that the
Readers of _Pamela_ will be charm’d by it, tho’ they should suppose,
that his inimitable Benevolence has over-valu’d the Piece itself._}

  Inspir’d, without doubt, by some Skill, more than human, and
  comprehending in an humble, and seemingly artless, Narration,
  a Force that can tear up the Heart-strings, this Author has prepar’d
  an enamouring _Philtre_ for the Mind, which will excite such a
  _Passion_ for Virtue, as scarce to leave it in the Power of the
  _Will_ to neglect her.

  _Longinus_, I remember, distinguishing by what Marks we may know the
  _Sublime_, says, it is chiefly from an Effect that will follow the
  Reading it: a delightfully-adhering Idea, that clings fast to the
  Memory; and from which it is difficult for a Man to disengage his
  Attention.---If _this_ is a Proof of the _Sublime_, there was never
  _Sublimity_ so lastingly felt, as in PAMELA!

  Not the Charmer’s own prattling Idea stuck so close to the Heart of
  her Master, as the Incidents of her Story to the Thoughts of a
  Reader.---The Author transports, and transforms, with a Power more
  extensive than _Horace_ requires, in his POET!---

  Mr. _B----_, and the Turns of his Passions---and the Softness, yet
  Strength, of their amiable Object---after having given us the most
  masterly Image of Nature, that ever was painted! take Possession of,
  and _dwell in_, the Memory.

  And there, too, broods the kind and the credulous Parson WILLIAMS’s
  _Dove_, (without _serpentine_ Mixture) hatching _Pity_ and
  _Affection_, [4th, change 8.] {for an Honesty so sincere, and so
  silly!}

  There too, take their Places All the _lower_ Supports of this
  beautiful Fabrick.---

  I am sometimes transform’d into plain Goodman ANDREWS, and sometimes
  the good Woman, his Wife.

  As for old Mr. LONGMAN, and JONATHAN, the Butler, they are sure of
  me both, in their Turns.

  Now and-then, I am COLBRAND the _Swiss_: but, as _broad_ as _I
  stride_, in that Character, I can never escape Mrs. JEWKES: who
  often keeps me awake in the Night---

  Till the Ghost of Lady DAVERS, drawing open the Curtains, scares the
  _Scarer_, of me, and of PAMELA!---

  And, then, I take Shelter with poor penitent JOHN, and the rest of
  the _Men_ and the _Maids_, of all whom I may say, with compassionate
  _Marcia_,

  --------_The Youths DIVIDE their Reader._

[5th & 8th, change 9.]

{_And this fine Writer adds:_}

  I am glad I made War, in my last, upon the Notion of altering the
  Style: for, having read it twice over since then, (and to Audiences,
  where the _Tears_ were applausively eloquent) I could hardly, here
  and there, find a Place, where one Word _can_ be chang’d for a
  better. There are some indeed, where ’twere _possible_ to leave out,
  a few, without making a Breach in the Building. But, in short, the
  Author has put so bewitching a Mixture together, of the _Rais’d_
  with the _Natural_, and the _Soft_ with the _Strong_ and the
  _Eloquent_---thatnever Sentiments were finer, and fuller of Life!
  never any were utter’d so sweetly!---Even in what relates to the
  pious and frequent Addresses to God, I now retract (on these two
  last Revisals) the Consent I half gave, on a _former_, to the
  anonymous Writer’s Proposal, who advis’d the Author to _shorten_
  those Beauties.----Whoever considers his _Pamela_ with a View to
  find Matter for Censure, is in the Condition of a passionate Lover,
  who breaks in upon his Mistress, without Fear or Wit, with Intent to
  accuse her, and quarrel---He came to her with Pique in his Purpose;
  but his _Heart_ is too hard for his _Malice_---and he goes away more
  enslav’d, for complaining.


[_del._ 5th]

{_The following delightful Story, so admirably related, will give great
Pleasure to the Reader; and we take the Liberty of inserting it, for
that very Reason._}

[_del._ 8th]

  {What a never-to-be satisfied _Length_ has this Subject always the
  Power of attracting me into! And yet, before I have done, I must by
  your means tell the Author a _Story_, which a Judge not so skilful
  in Nature as he is, might be in Danger perhaps of mistaking, for a
  trifling and silly one. I expect it shou’d give him the clearest
  Conviction, in a Case he is subject to question.}

[_del._ 8th]

  {We have a lively little Boy in the Family, about seven Years
  old---but, alas for him, poor Child! quite unfriended; and born to
  no Prospect. He is the Son of an honest, poor Soldier, by a Wife,
  grave, unmeaning, and innocent. Yet the Boy, (see the Power of
  connubial _Simplicity_) is so pretty, so genteel, and gay-spirited,
  that we have made him, and design’d him, our _own_, ever since he
  could totter, and waddle. The wanton Rogue is half Air: and every
  Motion he acts by has a Spring, like _Pamela_’s when she threw down
  the Card-table. All this Quickness, however, is temper’d by a
  good-natur’d Modesty: so that the wildest of his Flights are thought
  rather diverting than troublesome. He is an hourly Foundation for
  Laughter, from the Top of the House to the Parlours: and, to borrow
  an Attribute from the Reverend Mr. _Peters_, (tho’ without any Note
  of his Musick) _plays a very good_ FIDDLE in the Family. I have told
  you the History of this _Tom-tit_ of a Prater, because, ever since
  my first reading of PAMELA, he puts in for a Right to be _one_ of
  her Hearers; and, having got half her Sayings by heart, talks in no
  other Language but hers: and, what really surprises, and has charm’d
  me into a _certain_ Fore-taste of her Influence, he is, at once,
  become fond of his Book; which (before) he cou’d never be brought to
  attend to---that _he may read_ PAMELA, he says, _without stopping_.
  The first Discovery we made of this Power over so unripe and unfix’d
  an Attention, was, one Evening, when I was reading her Reflections
  at the _Pond_ to some Company. The little rampant Intruder, being
  kept out by the Extent of the Circle, had crept under my Chair, and
  was sitting before me, on the Carpet, with his Head almost touching
  the Book, and his Face bowing down toward the Fire.---He had sat for
  some time in this Posture, with a Stillness, that made us conclude
  him asleep: when, on a sudden, we heard a Succession of
  heart-heaving Sobs; which while he strove to conceal from our
  Notice, his little Sides swell’d, as if they wou’d burst, with the
  throbbing Restraint of his Sorrow. I turn’d his innocent Face, to
  look toward me; but his Eyes were quite lost, in his _Tears_: which
  running down from his Cheeks in free Currents, had form’d two
  sincere little Fountains, on that Part of the Carpet he hung over.
  All the Ladies in Company were ready to devour him with Kisses: and
  he has, since, become doubly a Favourite---and is perhaps the
  youngest of _Pamela’s Converts_.}

_The same [_del._ 5th] {incomparable} Writer has favour’d us with an
Objection, [_del._ 5th] {that is more material than any we have
mention’d;} which cannot be better stated nor answer’d, than in his own
[_del._ 8th] {beautiful} Words; viz._

  An Objection is come into my Thoughts, which I should be glad the
  Author would think proper to obviate in the Front of the Second
  Edition.

  There are Mothers, or Grandmothers, in all Families of affluent
  Fortune, who, tho’ they may have none of Lady _Davers_’s
  _Insolence_, will be apt to feel one of her _Fears_,---that the
  Example of a Gentleman so amiable as Mr. B--- may be follow’d, by
  the _Jackies, their Sons_, with too blind and unreflecting a
  Readiness. Nor does the Answer of that Gentleman to his Sister’s
  Reproach come quite up to the Point they will rest on. For, tho’
  indeed it is true, all the World wou’d acquit the best Gentleman in
  it, if he married _such_ a Waiting-maid as _Pamela_, yet, there is
  an ill-discerning Partiality, in Passion, that will overthrow all
  the Force of that Argument: because _every belov’d Maid will be
  PAMELA_, in a Judgment obscur’d by her Influence.

  And, since the Ground of this Fear will _seem_ solid, I don’t know
  how to be easy, till it is shewn (nor ought it to be left to the
  Author’s Modesty) that they who consider his Design in that Light
  will be found but short-sighted Observers.

  Request it of him then to suffer it to be told them, that not a
  limited, but general, Excitement to Virtue was the first and great
  End to his Story: And that this Excitement must have been deficient,
  and very imperfectly offer’d, if he had not look’d quite _as low as
  he cou’d_ for his Example: because if there had been any Degree or
  Condition, more remote from the Prospect than that which he had
  chosen to work on, that Degree might have seem’d out of Reach of the
  Hope, which it was his generous Purpose to encourage.---And, so, he
  was under an evident _Necessity_ to find such a Jewel in a
  _Cottage_: and expos’d, too, as she was, to the severest Distresses
  of Fortune, with Parents unable to support their own Lives, but from
  the daily hard Product of _Labour_.

  Nor wou’d it have been sufficient to have plac’d her thus _low_ and
  _distressful_, if he had not also suppos’d her a _Servant_: and that
  too in some elegant Family; for if she had always remain’d a
  Fellow-cottager with her Father, it must have carried an Air of
  Romantick Improbability to account for her polite Education.

  If she had _wanted_ those Improvements, which she found means to
  acquire in her _Service_, it wou’d have been very unlikely, that she
  shou’d have succeeded so well; and had destroy’d _one_ great _Use_
  of the Story, to have allow’d such uncommon Felicity to the Effect
  of mere _personal Beauty_.---And it had not been _judicious_ to have
  represented her as educated in a superior Condition of Life with the
  proper Accomplishments, before she became reduc’d by Misfortunes,
  and so not a Servant, but rather an Orphan under hopeless
  Distresses---because Opportunities which had made it no Wonder how
  she came to be so winningly qualified, wou’d have lessen’d her Merit
  in being so. And besides, where had then been the purpos’d
  Excitement of Persons in PAMELA’s Condition of Life, by an Emulation
  of her Sweetness, Humility, Modesty, Patience, and Industry, to
  attain some faint Hope of arriving, in time, within View of _her_
  Happiness?----And what a delightful Reformation shou’d we see, in
  all Families, where the Vanity of their _Maids_ took no Turn toward
  Ambition to _please_, but by such innocent Measures, as PAMELA’s!

  As it is clear, then, the Author was under a Necessity to suppose
  her a _Servant_, he is not to be accountable for mistaken
  Impressions, which the Charms he has given her may happen to make,
  on wrong Heads, or weak Hearts, tho’ in Favour of Maids the Reverse
  of her Likeness.

  What is it then (they may say) that the Lowness, and Distance of
  _Pamela’s_ Condition from the Gentleman’s who married her, proposes
  to teach the _Gay World_, and the _Fortunate_?---_It is this_---By
  Comparison with that infinite Remoteness of her Condition from the
  Reward which her Virtue procur’d her, one great _Proof_ is deriv’d,
  (which is Part of the _Moral_ of PAMELA) that Advantages from
  _Birth_, and Distinction of _Fortune_, have no Power at all, when
  consider’d against those from _Behaviour_, and Temper of _Mind_:
  because where the _Last_ are _not added_, all the _First_ will be
  boasted in vain. Whereas she who possesses the Last finds _no Want_
  of the First, in her Influence.

  In _that_ Light alone let the Ladies of _Rank_ look at
  PAMELA.---Such an alarming Reflection as that will, at the same time
  that it raises the Hope and Ambition of the _Humble_, correct and
  mortify the Disdain of the _Proud_. For it will compel them to
  observe, and acknowledge, that ’tis the Turn of their _Mind_, not
  the Claims of their _Quality_, by which (and which only) Womens
  Charms can be lasting: And that, while the _haughty Expectations_,
  inseparable from an elevated Rank, serve but to multiply its
  Complaints and Afflictions, the Condescensions of _accomplish’d
  Humility_, attracting Pity, Affection, and Reverence, secure an
  hourly Increase of Felicity.---So that the _moral Meaning_ of
  PAMELA’s Good-fortune, far from tempting young Gentlemen to marry
  _such_ Maids as are found in their Families, is, by teaching Maids
  to _deserve to be Mistresses_, to stir up Mistresses _to support
  their Distinction_.

[_del._ 4th]

{_We shall only add, That it was intended to prefix two neat
_Frontispieces_ to this Edition, (and to present them to the Purchasers
of the first) and one was actually finished for that Purpose; but there
not being Time for the other, from the Demand for the new Impression;
and the Engraving Part of that which was done (tho’ no Expence was
spared) having fallen very short of the Spirit of the Passages they were
intended to represent, the Proprietors were advised to lay them aside.
And were the rather induced to do so, from the following Observation of
a most ingenious Gentleman, in a Letter to the Editor._ “I am so
jealous, _says he,_ in Behalf of our _inward_ Idea of PAMELA’s _Person_,
that I dread _any_ figur’d Pretence to Resemblance. For it will be pity
to look at an _Air_, and imagine it _Hers_, that does not carry some
such elegant Perfection of Amiableness, as will be sure to find place in
the _Fancy_.”}




VERSES, sent to the Bookseller, for the Unknown Author [_del._ 8th]
{of the beautiful new Piece call’d} _PAMELA_.

  Blest be thy pow’rful Pen, whoe’er thou art,
  Thou skill’d, great _Moulder_ of the master’d Heart!
  Where hast thou lain conceal’d!---or why thought fit,
  At this dire Period, to _unveil_ thy Wit?
    O! late befriended Isle! had this broad Blaze,
  With earlier Beamings, bless’d our _Fathers_ Days,
  The Pilot Radiance, pointing out the Source,
  Whence public Health derives its [5th: “moral”] {vital} Course,
  Each timely Draught some healing Power had shown,
  Ere gen’ral _Gangrene_ blacken’d, to the _Bone_.
  But, fest’ring now, beyond all Sense of Pain,
  ’Tis hopeless: and the Helper’s Hand is _vain_.
    Sweet _Pamela_! forever-blooming Maid!
  Thou dear, unliving, yet immortal, Shade!
  Why are thy Virtues scatter’d to the Wind?
  Why are thy Beauties flash’d upon the Blind?
    What, tho’ thy flutt’ring Sex might learn, from thee,
  That _Merit_ forms a Rank, above _Degree_?
  That Pride, too conscious, falls, from ev’ry _Claim_,
  While humble Sweetness climbs, beyond its _Aim_?
  What, tho’ Religion, smiling from thy Eyes,
  Shews her _plain_ Power, and charms without _Disguise_?
  What, tho’ thy warmly-pleasing moral Scheme
  Gives livelier Rapture, than the Loose can _dream_?
  What, tho’ thou build’st, by thy persuasive Life,
  Maid, Child, Friend, Mistress, Mother, Neighbour, Wife?
  Tho’ Taste like thine each Void of Time, can fill,
  Unsunk by Spleen, unquicken’d by Quadrille!
  What, tho’ ’tis thine to bless the lengthen’d Hour!
  Give _Permanence_ to Joy, and _Use_ to Pow’r?
  Lend late-felt Blushes to the _Vain_ and _Smart_?
  And squeeze cramp’d Pity from the _Miser_’s Heart?
  What, tho’ ’tis thine to hush the Marriage Breeze,
  Teach Liberty to _tire_, and Chains to _please_?
  Thine tho’, from Stiffness to divest Restraint,
  And, to the Charmer, reconcile the _Saint_?
  Tho’ Smiles and Tears obey thy moving Skill,
  And Passion’s ruffled Empire waits thy Will?
  Tho’ thine the fansy’d Fields of flow’ry Wit,
  Thine, Art’s whole Pow’r, in Nature’s Language writ!
  Thine, to convey strong Thought, with modest Ease,
  And, copying _Converse_, teach its _Style_ to please?
  Tho’ thine each Virtue, that a _God_ cou’d lend?
  Thine, ev’ry Help, that ev’ry Heart, can mend?
  ’Tis Thine _in vain_!----Thou wak’st a _dying_ Land;
  And lift’st _departed Hope_, with fruitless Hand:
  Death has NO CURE. Thou hast _mis-tim’d_ thy Aim;
  _Rome_ had her GOTHS: and all, beyond, was _Shame_.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


William Andrews Clark Memorial Library: University of California

THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY

_General Editors_

  R. C. BOYS
  University of Michigan

  RALPH COHEN
  University of California, Los Angeles

  VINTON A. DEARING
  University of California, Los Angeles

  LAWRENCE CLARK POWELL
  Wm. Andrews Clark Memorial Library

  _Corresponding Secretary_: Mrs. EDNA C. DAVIS,
    Wm. Andrews Clark Memorial Library

The Society exists to make available inexpensive reprints (usually
facsimile reproductions) of rare seventeenth and eighteenth century
works. The editorial policy of the Society remains unchanged. As in
the past, the editors welcome suggestions concerning publications. All
income of the Society is devoted to defraying cost of publication and
mailing.

All correspondence concerning subscriptions in the United States and
Canada should be addressed to the William Andrews Clark Memorial
Library, 2205 West Adams Boulevard, Los Angeles 18, California.
Correspondence concerning editorial matters may be addressed to any of
the general editors. The membership fee is $3.00 a year for subscribers
in the United States and Canada and 15/- for subscribers in Great
Britain and Europe. British and European subscribers should address
B. H. Blackwell, Broad Street, Oxford, England.


Publications for the eighth year [1953-1954]

  [The notation [*] means that the title was apparently never
  published. The Sarbiewski volume is currently in preparation for
  Project Gutenberg. The song collection was published with the title
  “...Songbooks”.]

(At least six items, most of them from the following list, will be
reprinted.)

JOHN BAILLIE: _An Essay on the Sublime_ (1747). Introduction by
  Samuel H. Monk.

Contemporaries of the _Tatler_ and _Spectator_. Introduction by
  Richmond P. Bond.

_John Dart and George Ogle on Chaucer._ Introduction by William L.
  Alderson.  [*]

JOHN T. DESAGULIERS: _The Newtonian System of the World the Best Model
  of Government_ (1728). Introduction by Marjorie H. Nicolson.  [*]

_Sale Catalogue of Mrs. Piozzi’s Effects_ (1816). Introduction by
  John Butt.  [*]

M. C. SARBIEWSKI: _The Odes of Casimire_ (1646). Introduction by
  Maren-Sofie Rœstvig.

_Selections from Seventeenth-Century Songs._ Introduction by
  Jennifer W. Angel.

_A Sermon Preached at the Cathedral Church of St. Paul_ (1745).
  [Probably by Samuel Johnson]. Introduction by James L. Clifford.  [*]


Publications for the first seven years (with the exception of Nos. 1-6,
which are out of print) are available at the rate of $3.00 a year.
Prices for individual numbers may be obtained by writing to the Society.

  THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY
  _WILLIAM ANDREWS CLARK MEMORIAL LIBRARY_
  2205 West Adams Boulevard, Los Angeles 18, California

Make check or money order payable to THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA.




PUBLICATIONS OF THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY

  [Where available, Project Gutenberg e-text numbers are shown in
  brackets.]


FIRST YEAR (1946-1947)

Numbers 1-6 out of print.

   [Titles:
   1. Richard Blackmore’s _Essay upon Wit_ (1716), and Addison’s
      _Freeholder_ No. 45 (1716).  [13484]
   2. Anon., _Essay on Wit_ (1748), together with Characters by
      Flecknoe, and Joseph Warton’s _Adventurer_ Nos. 127 and 133.
      [14973]
   3. Anon., _Letter to A. H. Esq.; concerning the Stage_ (1698), and
      Richard Willis’ _Occasional Paper_ No. IX (1698).  [14047]
   4. Samuel Cobb’s _Of Poetry_ and _Discourse on Criticism_ (1707).
      [14528]
   5. Samuel Wesley’s _Epistle to a Friend Concerning Poetry_ (1700)
      and _Essay on Heroic Poetry_ (1693).  [16506]
   6. Anon., _Representation of the Impiety and Immorality of the Stage_
      (1704) and anon., _Some Thoughts Concerning the Stage_ (1704).
      [15656] ]


SECOND YEAR (1947-1948)

7. John Gay’s _The Present State of Wit_ (1711); and a section on Wit
  from _The English Theophrastus_ (1702).  [14800]

8. Rapin’s _De Carmine Pastorali_, translated by Creech (1684).  [14495]

9. T. Hanmer’s (?) _Some Remarks on the Tragedy of Hamlet_ (1736).
  [14899]

10. Corbyn Morris’ _Essay towards Fixing the True Standards of Wit,
  etc._ (1744).  [16233]

11. Thomas Purney’s _Discourse on the Pastoral_ (1717).  [15313]

12. Essays on the Stage, selected, with an Introduction by Joseph Wood
  Krutch.  [16335]


THIRD YEAR (1948-1949)

13. Sir John Falstaff (pseud.), _The Theatre_ (1720).  [15999]

14. Edward Moore’s _The Gamester_ (1753).  [16267]

15. John Oldmixon’s _Reflections on Dr. Swift’s Letter to Harley_
  (1712); and Arthur Mainwaring’s _The British Academy_ (1712).
  [In preparation]

16. Nevil Payne’s _Fatal Jealousy_ (1673).  [16916]

17. Nicholas Rowe’s _Some Account of the Life of Mr. William
  Shakespeare_ (1709).  [16275]

18. “Of Genius,” in _The Occasional Paper_, Vol. III, No. 10 (1719);
  and Aaron Hill’s Preface to _The Creation_ (1720).  [15870]


FOURTH YEAR (1949-1950)

19. Susanna Centlivre’s _The Busie Body_ (1709).  [16740]

20. Lewis Theobold’s _Preface to The Works of Shakespeare_ (1734).
  [16346]

21. _Critical Remarks on Sir Charles Grandison, Clarissa, and Pamela_
  (1754).

22. Samuel Johnson’s _The Vanity of Human Wishes_ (1749) and Two
  _Rambler_ papers (1750).  [13350]

23. John Dryden’s _His Majesties Declaration Defended_ (1681).  [15074]

24. Pierre Nicole’s _An Essay on True and Apparent Beauty in Which from
  Settled Principles is Rendered the Grounds for Choosing and Rejecting
  Epigrams_, translated by J. V. Cunningham.


FIFTH YEAR (1950-1951)

25. Thomas Baker’s _The Fine Lady’s Airs_ (1709).  [14467]

26. Charles Macklin’s _The Man of the World_ (1792).  [14463]

27. Frances Reynolds’ _An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Taste,
  and of the Origin of Our Ideas of Beauty, etc._ (1785).  [13485]

28. John Evelyn’s _An Apologie for the Royal Party_ (1659); and
  _A Panegyric to Charles the Second_ (1661).  [17833]

29. Daniel Defoe’s _A Vindication of the Press_ (1718).  [14084]

30. Essays on Taste from John Gilbert Cooper’s _Letters Concerning
  Taste_, 3rd edition (1757), & John Armstrong’s _Miscellanies_ (1770).
  [13464]


SIXTH YEAR (1951-1952)

31. Thomas Gray’s _An Elegy Wrote in a Country Church Yard_ (1751);
  and _The Eton College Manuscript_.  [15409]

32. Prefaces to Fiction; Georges de Scudéry’s Preface to _Ibrahim_
  (1674), etc.  [14525]

33. Henry Gally’s _A Critical Essay_ on Characteristic-Writings (1725).
  [16299]

34. Thomas Tyers’ A Biographical Sketch of Dr. Samuel Johnson (1785).

35. James Boswell, Andrew Erskine, and George Dempster. _Critical
  Strictures on the New Tragedy of Elvira, Written by Mr. David Malloch_
  (1763).  [15857]

36. Joseph Harris’s _The City Bride_ (1696).  [22974]


SEVENTH YEAR (1952-1953)

37. Thomas Morrison’s _A Pindarick Ode on Painting_ (1767). [In
    preparation]

38. John Phillips’ _A Satyr Against Hypocrites_ (1655).

39. Thomas Warton’s _A History of English Poetry_.

40. Edward Bysshe’s _The Art of English Poetry_ (1708).

41. Bernard Mandeville’s “_A Letter to Dion_” (1732).

42. Prefaces to Four Seventeenth-Century Romances.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

Errata (noted by transcriber):

  deserves not only Acknowlegdment, but ...
    [_text unchanged: error for “Acknowledgment”?_]
  ... for the Unknown Author [_del._ 8th] {of the beautiful new Piece
  call’d} _PAMELA_
    [_text unchanged, but “of” probably belongs outside the hand-drawn
    brackets_]
  Maren-Sofie Rœstvig
    [_spelling shown as printed, but correct form is “Røstvig”
    (o-slash, 28th letter of Norwegian alphabet)_]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Samuel Richardson's Introduction to
Pamela, by Samuel Richardson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INTRODUCTION TO PAMELA ***

***** This file should be named 24860-0.txt or 24860-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/8/6/24860/

Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner, Chris Curnow and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
