The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Voyage of The First Hessian Army from
Portsmouth to New York, 1776, by Albert Pfister and Johann Gottfried Seume

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Voyage of The First Hessian Army from Portsmouth to New York, 1776

Author: Albert Pfister
        Johann Gottfried Seume

Release Date: November 10, 2008 [EBook #27230]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIRST HESSIAN ARMY, 1776 ***




Produced by Markus Brenner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





                  Heartman’s Historical Series No. 3


                              THE VOYAGE
                                  OF

                        The First Hessian Army

                      FROM PORTSMOUTH TO NEW YORK
                                 1776



                One hundred and ten Copies printed for
                  CHAS. FRED. HEARTMAN, New York City




The following Historical Sketch is a translation from the German of A.
Pfister. It was published some fifty years ago in a German periodical
and is interesting enough to be reprinted in English as it contains
hitherto very little known details of this voyage. At the end will be
found an Extract from the Diary of the German Poet and Adventurer, J. G.
Seume, a Hessian Soldier and Participator on the Voyage.

January, 1915
                                                       CH. F. H.


                   Number ___ of 110 copies printed.
                   Also six printed on Japan Vellum.


The troops belonging to the first Hessian Division had as yet not all
been assembled in the harbor of Portsmouth, for, on account of the lack
of transport ships, General von Mirbach with his regiment and that of
Commander Rall, a Knyphausen Company, and a part of the Commissariat
still remained at Bremerlehe, when the fleet was ready and the wind
often long in coming, was just then very favorable to leave the channel.
Then a rather peculiar circumstance occurred to prevent the start.
Heister, the Hessian Commander-in-Chief, refused to start, feeling bound
by the land grave’s express orders to keep all his divisions together.
The king became exceedingly impatient, for the delay set an incalculable
amount at stake—at last the Hessian minister at London, General von
Schlieffen, took upon himself the responsibility of this urgent matter,
and Heister, with a spirit of true faithfulness to service, went over
with his Hessian troop ships to the remaining squadron at anchor at St.
Hellens in the immediate vicinity.

The fleet as gathered here numbered 100 sailing vessels, among which
were 2 men-of-war with 50 cannons, 4 frigates of 36 cannons, and 2
fire-ships for the protection of the transports and provision ships.
These vessels carried in all about 12,500 land troops, of which the 7400
Hessians were distributed in 52 ships. William Hotham, their Commodore,
was on the man-of-war Preston. When the ship captains had received from
him the signaling directions and their sealed instructions (which may be
opened only after a ship has sailed in order to learn its destination),
he gave the signals to weigh anchor and to sail by means of a cannon
shot and the displaying of a flag. This was on the evening of the 6th of
May.

Very soon an adverse and violent storm arose, the sea became turbulent
and there was much seasickness. No one could stand upright in the
cabins, everything was tossed about pell-mell and sailors fell overboard
and could not be saved; yet the fleet by the evening of the 9th was
sailing with calmer weather through the dangerous region of the Scilly
Islands, where, over a mass of rocks and reefs a warning lighthouse
stood. After sunset the last land was seen to disappear under the
horizon, the promontory, Landsend. On the next day the cables, which
usually are on the capstan, were coiled on deck; still greater waves,
and more violent motions of the ship indicated that the vessels had
reached the great ocean. Who may be the master of the ocean was made
evident during the very next few days to the astonished soldiers, when a
Danish and later two Swedish East Indian ships were passing through the
fleet; these then lowered their flags and a sail of the middle mast, as
soon as they were within the distance of a shot. This was the mark of
esteem which every foreign ship on meeting an English man-of-war or
squadron in the Atlantic Ocean was to render to it, as indicating the
recognition of Great Britain’s sovereignty there.

A perfect calm had set in; the great waves rose to an astonishing
height, and, although at a time of wind and full sail, the vibrations of
the ships are lessened by the quick forward motion, yet in calm the
opposite is true, for the ships were heaving and pitching, so that there
seemed to be danger of complete capsizing, or at any rate of the loss of
the masts. In the darkness of night the foam sparkled on the ships and
at times the lightning flashed and quivered on the waves. Several ships
had already met with accidents, in getting badly damaged by running
against each other, and in some the constant pumping out of water was
made necessary. The ship Good Intent ran with its prow into the stern of
the Claudina, on which there was a company of the regiment von
Knyphausen under Lieutenant Baum, and to the great anguish and cry of
the crew and troops made a great hole over the cabin. The ship
Speedwell, on which there was Lieutenant-Colonel Block with the
Grenadier-Company of the Prince Karl regiment drew so much water that it
seemed doomed to sink. Accordingly signals of distress were hoisted, the
Commodore signaled the fleet to halt and by means of several boats had
the ship thoroughly investigated. It became evident that there was no
immediate danger, and that, with constant use of the pumps, the
Speedwell could continue the voyage.

On the 20th of May a strong wind suddenly arose (simply good fresh air
as the sailors said), but the water became rough, the waves struck over
the decks, and all fires were ordered to be put out; porpoises made
their appearance in great numbers, the sight of which was cheering
especially to the officers who shot at them; little was it supposed by
them then that these porpoises were but the forerunners of an
approaching storm. On the 25th the whole sky became clouded over with
dark and heavy clouds, the air became close and sultry, and the
Commodore had shots fired frequently as a signal to prevent the
scattering of the ships. The wind and waves became more violent from
hour to hour during the night of the 25th to the 26th, and on Whitsunday
the full force of the storm was felt. The Commodore gave the signal to
draw in all sails except one and to remove the uppermost parts of the
masts. The ships were being scattered far apart. In the cabins all
articles, though tied fast, were broken loose and were thrown
helter-skelter, the occupants likewise, many with bruised limbs, and
there was no end to the spells of seasickness and of misery made
ridiculous. The storm was ever growing worse. On the second day the last
sail was drawn in, and the rudder bound fast, so that now the ship was
left to its fate. The raging sea was playing with the gigantic
structure of the ships as with a toy; sailors were swallowed up by the
waters, others committed suicide and soldiers who ventured to go on deck
fell down unconscious because of the force of the waves. Only one
consolation remained, namely, the clarified atmosphere; but on the third
day of Whitsuntide dark gloomy clouds and torrents of rain darkened the
whole firmament, the winds seemed to be let loose, sounding like roaring
thunder, all nature seemed to have united in bringing to young America a
terrible funeral feast. While thousands are pleading here for the
protection of Heaven a furious wrathful indignation rages in the
American pulpit scattering its curses and, praying to God and the
Savior, dedicates the fleet to destruction.

With a loud and deafening roar the huge waves wash over the ships; the
decks and every port-hole had to be made extra tight. The soldiers were
lying in the lower compartments as if buried alive in coffins, gasping
in the darkness after air and water; from moment to moment the most of
them, quiet and depressed, expected to go out of this dark night into
the eternal day of heaven. Still on the next day the storm was raging
and the heavy sea also continued, and this threatened to break the ships
to pieces; but the clouds broke, the great downfall of rain ceased, the
air became clear, the wind subsided, and in the evening at 10 o’clock
the storm had stopped entirely—only the seething waters were still
roaring and placed the ships in even greater danger. It was not until
the morning of the 30th that this violent sea had spent its fury; sound
sleep reinvigorated exhausted nature; and when the soldiers and sailors
awoke to the beautiful day and looked out upon the glittering, smooth,
quiet sea, and saw how little by little the ships drew closer together,
they each and everyone felt as if they had awakened to a new day of
creation. The kitchen fires were again glowing, the kettles were
steaming, the provisions, clothing and bed linen, all so thoroughly wet
through, were dried, everywhere repairs were undertaken, the masts were
again properly set up, and the sails spread; on the decks praises to God
were sung with fervent feelings of gratitude in devout meetings of
prayer.

The religious, sympathetic feelings certainly prevail in the deeply
rooted piety of our (Hessian) people. It was customary on all ships that
as often as the weather and the motion of the vessel permitted it, a
prayer meeting should be held every morning and every evening and a
preaching service on Sundays. Though not obliged to attend, yet one
could regularly see the soldierly religious congregation assembled,
standing with uncovered heads and filled with devotion, drawn thither by
the inner voice of conscience. If the sea were rough then one could hear
the people from their resting places starting up religious hymns.
Communion with God was necessary for the soul; more urgently did the
present remind of eternity, and the very recent past give grounds for
gratitude. The ordinary man had in lieu of other songs learned to sing
his religious hymns at school, and he sang these even during his march
against the enemy. It was not a book of epic poems that accompanied him
on his expeditions, it was a small book of prayer, which even now is a
chief constituent part of the small bookshops of the Hessian
peasant-folk, so precious to him because of the divine power of its
influence, to his mind a pure, old, genuine “Jesus wine.” This was the
well known “Habermännchen,” the epic poem and the private chapel of the
warrior as well as of the serving man. And not alone with the exalted
spectacle of divine omnipotence on the furious or rapturous sea—but
even in the camps and quarters the masses of soldiers did not neglect
public worship any more than they neglected a simple military duty. So
with the ancient fear of God of the patriarchs in their hearts the
Hessian people landed on the soil of America.

The dispersion of the fleet had obliged a halt of three days, during
which time the frigates sailed in all directions, collecting the ships
by means of cannon shots, yet this was not entirely successful; fifteen
battered ships had opened their sealed orders and had sailed on ahead to
Halifax, the goal designated therein. The contrary winds prevented the
advance of the fleet. It appeared in great grandeur on the 4th of June;
this was the birthday of King George III. In unusual splendor did the
day shine, on all vessels the red English flag was waving, on all war
ships and all frigates, twenty-one cannon shots resounded at noon and
the transport ships were only too glad to follow with their joyful
celebrations. But on the ship Unanimity an unfortunate pistol shot was
fired in the morning. A captain of the life-guards, Count von der Lippe,
offended one of his subordinates, Lieutenant Kleinschmidt, because he,
though accidentally, had caused his dog to give a cry of pain, and with
coarse words demanded an immediate pistol duel without witnesses. The
lieutenant gave his opponent a mortal wound. The one was descended from
a sovereign house, the other of humble civil origin, yet according to
the ancient chivalrous views, which at all times prevail in the military
profession, they were equals. The court-martial, also in consequence
thereof, acquitted the lieutenant. This is the proceeding followed in
accordance with all proper army regulations: the highest officer next to
the count takes the lieutenant’s sword, places a sentinel over him, made
a request, by means of a speaking-trumpet, of the commodore, whose ship
fortunately was quite near, for a clever English surgeon (as the Hessian
Army generally had but few well qualified army surgeons) and then takes
a boat to the ship Elizabeth to make a report to the Lieutenant-General.
Immediately a court-martial is ordered, Lieutenant Kleinschmidt, under
arrest, is taken to the ship of the staff of the regiment, and the
staff-surgeon-major and the chief staff-chaplain were sent to the count.
The former could do nothing except to leave the dying man to the
services of the latter. In prayer with the chaplain, during which time a
religious service was being held on deck, the count departed this life.
Thereupon the adjutants of the general took an inventory of the effects
of the deceased, an autopsy was held to determine the cause of death,
then, dressed in his military suit, placed into a hammock weighted down
with stone, and sewed in white canvas, without any further formality,
his body was consigned to the sea.

Dense fogs had fallen; in order to keep the ships together frequent
shots were fired from the commodore’s ship; the danger of knocking
against one another was unavoidable. The ships, Happy Jeanette and
Henrietta, because of the carelessness on the part of the former, ran
against each other at a time when the winds were strong and the sails
were set full, so that the latter very nearly capsized, and,
hard-pressed by the former, could not again right itself. On all faces
there was the picture of death; and panic arose. The soldiers of the
regiment von Ditfurth, driven to despair, endeavored to leap upon the
Jeanette and those of the regiment Prince Karl tried to save their lives
on the Happy, and only with difficulty were they prevented from doing an
act of foolhardiness which would have cost the lives of many. After
repeated knocks the two ships were finally parted; in the Henrietta a
great hole had been made—only one foot lower down and in a few minutes
nothing more would have been seen of the ship. There were on this ship
Captain von Malsburg, the Lieutenants von Ditfurth, von Malsburg, von
Bardeleben, and Ensign von Schachten.

A new drama took place soon after the 10th of June. A frigate brought
the orders to set all ships and cannon in defensive condition; an East
Indian ship had reported the proximity of many American privateers. One
of these had even been captured. The Hessian officers thereupon set all
cannon in order and arranged for the distribution of the men in the case
of an attack. The commodore remained now in the middle of the fleet, a
frigate had to stay at the head in his place, and the others had to be
all the more active, everywhere in the fleet, as commodore’s messengers,
to keep up the order and to search every strange vessel. Even the
transport vessels received orders in case they should discover a strange
vessel to display a red flag at the stern of the ship until the
commodore by means of a similar signal has indicated that he has taken
cognizance of the information. Almost to the very tops of the masts the
guards on watch could be seen. More frequently than ever the stragglers
now received the usual warning (always with a fine of money imposed),
namely, several sharp cannon shots which struck close to them. The same
was the case with those ships which sailed too fast in advance of the
others. As soon as the commodore had given the signal by means of the
flag-language, one could see the marines and the sailors on the
men-of-war practice fully armed and equipped and with such great zeal
carry on a naval battle exercise as certainly cannot be shown any better
in a real battle. By means of bags of sand the decks were protected
against cannon shot from the side; back of these, men with muskets; at
different places the auxiliary troops; at the middle mast the chief
sentry; between the masts a sort of pile structure for defense was built
up to accommodate smaller cannon and soldiers; with uncommon dexterity
the artillery was managed; and at last the sailors with lances and other
like weapons hurried on deck to drill for defense in order to prevent
the enemy from mounting the ship.

With many a change of wind and weather, of calm and turbulent sea, of
joyous or anxious feeling, the great sandbanks of New Foundland were
reached on the 20th of June.

A mighty sea of breakers indicates the location of these sandbanks; upon
their precipitous rocky walls covered forty fathoms high by the sea, the
restless ocean waves are beating and are with a like force repelled. The
winds go howling over them; dense, cold fogs always cover these regions.
In order to warm the ships against colliding, the drums, foghorns and
ship bells were resounding day and night on all ships. In order to
prevent their being separated too far from one another a cannon shot was
fired every half hour on the commodore’s ship. Nevertheless many ships
drifted from their course; fourteen of them were found by a fire ship
and conducted to Halifax. For three or four days the ships remained in
the vicinity of the sandbanks. The many phenomena seen there increased
the astonishment of the ordinary man concerning the wonders of the sea,
which had here appeared to him: the whale, swimming majestically; and
the spongy mass polyps, scarcely with the organization of a living
creature; multitudes of porpoises, which pursued with amusing leaps out
of the water the course of the flying fish, and the latter then fell
down upon the decks, where they found a more certain death; shoals of
dolphins, which followed the ships with their glittering colors, and
often were reached by the harpoon or other weapon thrown at them; in the
dark night countless brilliant, fiery stripes, generated by a school of
fishes swiftly passing through the waters; turtles, caught for the
tables of the gentlemen; whole swarms of wild ducks; above all the
enormous quantity of cod fish, which had caused several fleets of
French, British and Norwegian fishing smacks to be gathered here, and
now enriched the kitchens of the army fleet.

On the 25th of June the sandbanks were left behind and from the damp,
biting cold, against which even the protection of a fur mantle was of no
avail, the expedition experienced a warm, beautiful day and soon again
many changes of weather. The great number of whales now to be seen
indicated the proximity of the coast of Nova Scotia. A green fir tree,
which was floating on the waters, brought still more joyful tidings. The
ever diminishing depth of the sea on July 3rd gave rise to the hope that
yet before evening land would come into sight, but as heavy fogs and
strong winds set in it became necessary to avoid the probable dangers by
returning to the deeper ocean. Ever following a course of approaching
and then leaving the coast, and experiencing another heavy thunder
storm, which tore the sails to pieces, it was with indescribable joy
that the coast of Nova Scotia came to view on the 7th at break of day.
As soon as the anchoring place of Halifax was reached the commodore
signaled to the fleet to gather and sail before the wind. Now those
ships came along and rejoined the fleet which had become lost in the
fogs and had anchored several days previously in the harbor. They
greeted the commodore with fifteen shots and he replied with eleven.
From these ships much information was gained, and especially did they
bring joyful news about the ship Malaga, which had become totally lost
to all appearances in the Whitsuntide storm, and which with all on
board, a company of the life-guards, under Captain Waldenberg, had
already been given up as lost. Its bowsprit was gone and it had suffered
considerable damage too, but it had had the good fortune to bring to
Halifax a French ship which was carrying munitions of war to the
Americans. A reward of 2,000 pounds sterling had been granted to the
commander and his troops—but in course of time this was paid out to the
commanders of the English men-of-war. Having joined the great British
fleet it had followed the commander in chief, General Howe, to the new
rendezvous of the squadron and of the army.

Howe had already begun his career with blunders and perplexities. He had
been selected through an unfortunate vote conducted by his party and so
was entrusted with an affair, the nature of which demanded, in the midst
of the transactions of considerate love, the speediest progress of arms
and the greatest decision of character. Instead of leaving Boston, the
firebrand of the war, so important because of its location, either not
at all, or at such an early time that the state of New York which was
still chiefly loyal could be saved, he started for Halifax so
inopportunely, that meanwhile the power of the Congress was made felt in
New York, and prepared there the strongest defence; Howe finally made
Rhode Island his destination, and changed his mind during the trip, and
at last aimed for New York, when the commodore, William Hotham,
collected before Halifax the previously given sealed orders from the
several ship captains and had designated Rhode Island as the new
destination, a frigate brought the again changed instruction to fix as
rendezvous the lighthouse of Sandy Hook.

The joy of immediate landing after so long a voyage, which had even
become highly disagreeable towards the close, was now gone. The various
changes as to their destination, the unfavorable weather, poor sailing
vessels, which oftentimes had to be taken in tow by the war vessels, and
the difficulty to keep together such a fleet, always in danger of
hostile attack, all combined to lengthen the voyage to 100 days, which
was even at that time very rare, and now could be of incalculable
advantage to the cause of the Americans. With an unfavorable wind the
fleet started; the eyes of everybody were directed to the green coast
and the undulating hilly background. During the night the sharp glow of
the Halifax lighthouse accompanied the troops, until, like a star
gradually fading away, it at last disappeared from view.

On the evening of the 8th of July the fleet halted. The ship Spring had,
by means of a signal of distress and four cannon shots, indicated that
it was in the greatest danger. All men-of-war approached it. They
learned that the sailors had mutinied, whereupon these were arrested,
and then exchanged for others. With a changeable wind the fleet
continued, now tacking, now sailing. To one of the ships the
threatening, gigantic cone of a water spout approached, yet it escaped
the danger of being overcome by its great deluge of water; elsewhere the
so-called St. Elmo’s Fire appeared at the tops of the masts, feared as
an apparition of a warning spirit; then on the night of the 11th to the
12th of July the sky and the ocean met, the spectacle of a most fearful
thunder storm. The ships kept at a great distance from each other, drew
in their sails, and while generally on the commodore’s ship the light
signal was burning, now on all ships the lanterns could be seen unlit,
vibrating in the deepest darkness; the clouds at night gave forth a most
violent hailstorm; the terrible waves roared and piled themselves up
into great fiery-looking mountains, the lightning flashed and quivered
in the air, now and then splintering the top of a mast. With thunder on
all sides and fearful in the expectation of the approaching storm, the
soldiers sank down in silent resignation and the crew remained during
the whole night on deck in anxious agitation and work. In the morning
there arose a strong wind which tore to pieces the sails on several
ships, but it also dispersed the storm clouds. Then, on the 14th, a calm
set in, and from the ships there resounded the hymns of the Sunday
services, but dense fog and continuous rains occurred and the vibrations
of the ship became in the calm ever greater. All at once there was a
great outcry in the fleet: Two ships, the Hartley (with Knyphausen
soldiers under Captain von Biesenrod) and Lord Sandwich (on board of
which was Colonel von Wurmb and a part of the life guards) could be seen
colliding because of the great waves, causing each other considerable
damage, and, thereupon, the ship Henrietta, with the Union, (upon which
there was Colonel von Herringen and a section of the regiment of
Losberg) could be seen likewise driven against each other. Alternately
heaving and sinking the upper ship always appeared as if threatening
destruction to the lower one, until the Union hoisted out a boat which,
then, by means of a rope thrown over the bowsprit, pulled the Henrietta
away. After a few agreeable days there followed on the 19th of July very
stormy weather, the sea was in a most furious rage, sails ripped apart,
but the ever agile activity of the sailors at the time of such
accidents, was always ready with instant relief and reparation. As a
spider that moves about as swiftly as the arrow in her web, so the
sailors were going up and down the rope ladders of the masts and through
the rigging, hanging only at their feet, tieing the tackle and binding
the sails. Then there followed days and nights too hot to be endured,
with heavy thunder storms; sleepless and famishing for a little fresh
air, the soldiers came even in the night time on deck; the longing for
the land grew hour by hour.

This most tedious voyage had given full play to the development of
diseases. The most careful cleanliness, the daily scrubbing of the
decks, the frequent cleaning of the cabins and rooms, the washing and
the disinfecting with steaming vinegar, the pumping in of fresh air, and
the airing of the bedding on decks: all this belonged to the general
health regimen, yet the effect of the restrained, often unnatural
physical exercises, and improper food, was not to be suppressed. While
to many a Hessian the ship became his first cradle, without granting
unto him in its hasty course a place which he could call his birthplace,
there were others, who, deceased, were buried at the bottom of the sea,
the Ensign von Stedel of the Regiment von Donop, among the first
victims. Scurvy was developed as a result of tainted humors, for which
the drinking of sea water was used as a medicine, and also the chewing
of tobacco, which the Hessians had learned from the sailors and later
kept up as a habit in their own homes. The disease reigned supreme,
however, and many individuals suffered for a long time yet after the
disembarkation from paralyzed limbs, and some even died. There was a
lack of the most necessary things. The food supplies provided for by the
officers themselves were exhausted, even the rations of zwieback were
cut down to only 17 loth (8½ oz.) a day. The water, which in the
whole fleet had been stored in new oaken casks, became undrinkable and
finally putrid. The beds of the soldiers were broken up in the storms,
camp kettles and canteens were smashed, tents, clothing apparel, even
the cartridges had been destroyed by the rats, which finally had even
gnawed through the water casks; all of these troubles more or less were
suffered by most of the transport ships.

Meanwhile a much wished for wind filled the sails, and the ever more and
more anxious, but daily disappointed hope, now at last to see New York,
grew upon its wings; yet the wind on the 30th of July became so strong
that the sails had to be drawn in, the rudders bound fast, and the ships
left to the shattering blows of the waves, which roaringly dashed and
resounded about the ships. As soon as the storm had subsided the
commodore by means of the cannon shots gathered together the scattered
fleet and gave instructions for a changed course in order to avoid being
driven against the near coast, but, unfortunately, the ships came into a
strong contrary current, the water again became high and turbulent, it
rained and lightened incessantly, masts toppled over, as was the case on
the Friendship which had on board 200 members of the Regiment Crown
Prince, besides Colonel von Hachenberg. Sailors and ship carpenters
found everywhere enough to do, until finally a favorable strong wind on
the 4th of August fortunately blew the fleet out of the current. On the
10th of August the fleet offered an excellent and very hopeful
appearance as it, in a most speedy wind, with high towering sails, was
cutting its course through the little waves. On the 11th, at the hour
of noon the happy signals indicating the sight of land were to be seen.
Soon the charming coast of Long Island came into the view of all and
great shouts of joy were wafted across the waters towards it from this
swimming city. Carefully did the fleet tack during the night because the
water was becoming ever more shallow. On the next morning, the 12th of
August, an English squadron of 24 vessels was seen from the ocean and
this, after a few hours, united with the fleet, following the mutual
greeting by means of a definite number of shots. Among the new arrivals
was also Major General von Mirbach with the troops which also belonged
to the first Hessian Division, and which did not take to the transport
ships at Bremerlehe until four weeks after the embarkation of Heister,
and then had waited for a favorable wind.

Now the English flag was unfurled on all ships; Sandy Hook came into
sight with its white lighthouse, immediately thereupon Staten Island,
and a veritable painting spread itself out before the eyes of these
newcomers, most charming after so many dangers had been encountered and
after so long a denial of a glance on the beautiful smiling landscapes,
teeming with inhabitants, exalted and majestic, the shores studded with
troops, the tents of a friendly and a hostile camp, of a forest of masts
of 500 ships, and the many hundred boats which so vigilantly were
watching the hostile shores—here a belligerent power assembled, such
as America had never seen before in order to have a combat, which in the
destiny of the world gave its immeasurable decision.


            _Extract from the Diary of the German Poet and
              Adventurer, J. G. Seume, a Hessian Soldier
                    and Participator on the Voyage_

On the English transporter we were pressed and packed like salted
herrings. To save room the deck, low as it was, had been partitioned
off, and we lay instead of in hammocks, in these bunks, one row above
the other. The deck was so low that a grown man could not stand upright,
and the bunks not high enough to sit in. These bunks were intended to
hold six men each but after four had entered, the remaining two could
only find room by pressing in. The situation was, especially in warm
weather, decidedly not cool: for one man to turn from one side to the
other alone was absolutely impossible, and to lie on one’s back was an
equal impossibility. The straightest way and the hardest edge were
necessary. After having roasted and sweated sufficiently on one side,
the man who had the place to the extreme right would call: round about
turn! and all would simultaneously turn to the other side, then having
received quantum sabis on this one the man to the left would give the
same signal. The maintainance was on an equal scale. Today bacon and
peas—peas and bacon tomorrow. Once in a while this menu was broken by
porridge or peeled barley, and as an occasional great feast by pudding.
This pudding was made of musty flour, half salt and half sweet water and
of very ancient mutton suet. The bacon could have been from four to five
years old, was black at both outer edges, became yellow a little farther
on and was white only in the very centre. The salted beef was in a very
similar condition. The biscuits were often full of worms which we had to
swallow in lieu of butter or dripping if we did not want to reduce our
scanty rations still more. Besides this they were so hard that we were
forced to use canon balls in breaking them into eatable pieces. Usually
our hunger did not allow us to soak them, and often enough we had not
the necessary water to do so. We were told (and not without some
probability of truth) that these biscuits were French, and that the
English, during the Seven Years’ War had taken them from French ships.
Since that time they had been stored in some magazine in Portsmouth and
that they were now being used to feed the Germans who were to kill the
French under Rochambeau and Lafayette in America—if God so wotted. But
apparently God did not seem to fancy this idea much.

The heavily sulphured water lay in deep corruption. After a barrel had
been hoisted up and opened, the deck was pervaded by a conglomeration of
very evil odours indeed. It was full of worms as long as a finger and
had to be filtered through a cloth before it could be drunken. And even
then it was dangerous to breathe above it. Rum and sometimes a little
strong beer helped to make it somewhat more drinkable.

Herded together in this manner, forced to breathe putrid air, to eat bad
food and to drink foul water, these youths, old men, students, merchants
and peasants, many of them but insufficiently clothed, were tossed about
for months upon the Atlantic.

Many of the sufferings undergone by us on this voyage were no doubt
unavoidable, and many of the recruits were used to a hard
life—nevertheless, many of the things they endured were the result of
an intentional deficiency of care taking and of a great greed.

What can be said of the British Quartermasters-Department which sent
these people to sea without proper food and drink? What of the Duke of
Brunswick who sent his subject to Canada without durable boots or
stockings and without overcoats? Often enough have men borne a hard life
cheerfully, because they knew the why and wherefore, but these poor
fellows suffered on account of a quarrel which was not their own,
suffered only that their masters might pay their debts or enjoy new
pleasures.



[Transcriber’s Note: The following correction was applied to the
original text:

p. 15: Habermänchen -> Habermännchen ]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Voyage of The First Hessian Army
from Portsmouth to New York, 1776, by Albert Pfister and Johann Gottfried Seume

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIRST HESSIAN ARMY, 1776 ***

***** This file should be named 27230-0.txt or 27230-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/2/3/27230/

Produced by Markus Brenner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
