Project Gutenberg's A Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, by John R. Clark Hall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary
       For the Use of Students

Author: John R. Clark Hall

Release Date: March 7, 2010 [EBook #31543]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CONCISE ANGLO-SAXON DICTIONARY ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Zoran Stefanovic, the Germanic
Lexicon Project, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.






[Transcriber’s Note:

This text includes characters that require UTF-8 (Unicode) file
encoding:

  ā ǣ ē ī ō ū ȳ (letters with macron or “long” mark)
  œ (oe ligature: rare)
  α, β (single Greek letters and a few words: both rare)

If any of these characters do not display properly--in particular, if
the diacritic does not appear directly above the letter--or if the
apostrophes and quotation marks in this paragraph appear as garbage,
make sure your text reader’s “character set” or “file encoding” is set
to Unicode (UTF-8). You may also need to change the default font.

Unless otherwise noted, words are spelled and alphabetized as in the
original.

  The letter æ is alphabetized as “ae”.
  The letter ð (eth) is alphabetized separately after “t”.
  The letters j and v are not used; medial k occurs only once.
  When two words are otherwise identical, the one containing a macron
    is usually given second.

Cross-references are shown as printed. When there is an error or
ambiguity, corrections are given in [[double brackets]] at the end of
the entry or as a separate paragraph. Where possible, these standard
wordings were used:

  under “mūs”
    The referenced word is either a secondary entry or a parenthesized
    alternative spelling in the form “mūs (ȳ)”.
  headword spelled “mūs”
    Minor difference, generally an added or omitted macron or
    a predictable vowel variation such as ī for ȳ.
  form of “mūs”
    The referenced word is an inflected form. A few very common patterns
    such as adverbs in “-līce” listed under adjectives in “-lic” are not
    individually noted.
  redirected to “mūs”
    The cross-referenced form leads to further cross-references.

To avoid empty cross-references, a few entries, clearly identified, were
restored from the first edition.

In the original book, shorter entries--chiefly cross-references--were
printed two or three to a line. They have been separated for this
e-text. All [single brackets], asterisks* and question marks? are in the
original.

In the body of the Dictionary, italics are shown conventionally with
_lines_, while small capitals are marked as #text#. Boldface in
headwords is unmarked; elsewhere it is shown as =text=. Superscript
numerals (“small superior figures”) are shown with a caret; braces are
used when necessary to avoid ambiguity.

  āwrēon^1,2 = strong verb, class 1 or 2
  bærnett (y^2) = second syllable also spelled with y
  234^1 = page 234, line 1

Typographical errors are listed at the end of the e-text. To avoid
confusion with original brackets, anything added by the transcriber is
shown in [[double brackets]].

The _New English Dictionary_ (NED) is now known as the Oxford English
Dictionary (OED).]


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


A CONCISE

ANGLO-SAXON DICTIONARY




  CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

  C. F. CLAY, Manager
  London: FETTER LANE, E.C.
  Edinburgh: 100 PRINCES STREET

  [Illustration: Publisher’s Device]

  Bombay, Calcutta and Madras: MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd.
  Toronto: J. M. DENT AND SONS, Ltd.
  Tokyo: THE MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA


  _All rights reserved_




  A CONCISE

  ANGLO-SAXON DICTIONARY

  FOR THE USE OF STUDENTS


  by

  JOHN R. CLARK HALL, M.A., Ph.D.


  Second Edition
  Revised And Enlarged


  New York:
  The Macmillan Company
  1916




  Cambridge:
  Printed by John Clay, M.A.
  at the University Press




PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


The first edition of this dictionary having been exhausted, it has been
extensively revised, and certain new features and alterations have been
introduced into it.

1. The principle of arranging all words according to their actual
spelling has been to a considerable extent abandoned. It was admittedly
an unscientific one, and opened the door to a good many errors and
inconsistencies. The head form in this edition may be either a
normalised form or one which actually occurs.

2. Words beginning with _ge-_ have been distributed among the letters of
the alphabet which follow that prefix, and the sign + has been employed
instead of _ge-_ in order to make the break in alphabetical continuity
as little apparent to the eye as possible. The sign ± has been used
where a word occurs both with and without the prefix.

3. References to Cook’s translation of Sievers’ _Anglo-Saxon Grammar_,
and to the Grammatical Introduction to Sweet’s _Reader_ have been taken
out, as Wright’s or Wyatt’s _Old English Grammar_ will have taken their
place with most English students.

4. A new feature which, it is hoped, will prove widely useful, is the
introduction of references to all, or nearly all, the headings in the
_New English Dictionary_ under which quotations from Anglo-Saxon texts
are to be found. A vast mass of valuable information as to the
etymology, meaning and occurrence of Old English words is contained in
that Dictionary, but is to a very large extent overlooked because it is
to be found under the head of words which are now obsolete, so that
unless one happens to know what was the last form which they had in
Middle English, one does not know how to get at it. This information
will be made readily available by the references in the present work,
which will form a practically complete index to the Anglo-Saxon material
in the larger dictionary and will at the same time put the student on
the track of interesting Middle English examples of the use of Old
English words. Besides directing the reader (by means of quotation
marks) to the heading in the _New English Dictionary_ where the relevant
matter may be found, an indication has been given of the texts from
which quotations are made therein, when these do not exceed four or
five[1].

    [Footnote 1: As regards the letter W and some small parts of other
    letters which have not yet appeared in the _NED_, a reference has
    been given to its abridgement (_The Concise Oxford Dictionary_).]

5. There have been many valuable contributions to Anglo-Saxon
lexicography (by Napier, Swaen, Schlütter, Förster, Wülfing and others)
since the first edition of this Dictionary appeared, and these have been
made use of, but (as before) unglossaried matter has not been
systematically searched for words not hitherto recorded in Anglo-Saxon
Dictionaries[2].

    [Footnote 2: The part of the Supplement to ‘Bosworth-Toller’ which
    has already appeared shows that Professor Toller is examining such
    matter with great care and thoroughness.]

6. The number of references to passages has been very largely increased.
All words occurring only in poetical texts have been marked. If they
occur more than once they bear the sign †, if only once, a reference to
the passage is generally given. If not they are marked ‡. As regards
prose texts, the rule has been only to give references to particular
passages in the case of rare words,--more especially ἅπαξ λεγόμενα. The
references to AO, CP and Æ which were given in the earlier edition have
been retained, as a useful indication that the word occurs in Early West
Saxon or Late West Saxon prose, as the case may be.

7. By various devices it has been found possible, while much increasing
the amount of matter in the book, to add very slightly to the number of
pages, and at the same time to reduce the number of columns on a page
from three to two. Most of these devices are more or less mechanical,
but one method of saving space may be mentioned. Certain compound words,
descriptive of places, which, as far as I know, occur only in charters
and which may often be more correctly regarded as proper nouns, have not
been separately inserted. Their meaning can however always be
ascertained by referring to their components, and where the abbreviation
Mdf is inserted the reader will understand that examples of words so
compounded, or of the components, or of both, will be found in Birch’s
_Cartularium Saxonicum_, or in Earle’s _Land Charters_, and that
references to those examples are given in Middendorff’s _Altenglisches
Flurnamenbuch_.

8. In the List of Abbreviations, etc. at the commencement of the book,
editions of texts which are furnished with a glossary have been
specially indicated.

    J. R. C. H.

    _January_, 1916.




LIST OF SIGNS AND ABBREVIATIONS WITH THEIR EXPLANATION


_Note_ 1. Where references are in _italic type_, quotations from the
texts indicated will be found in the _New English Dictionary_, under the
head of the English word which is distinguished in the article by
quotation marks (see Preface). In references to special passages volumes
have been marked off from pages by an inverted full stop, and lines or
verses have been shown, _where they follow other numerals_, by small
superior figures. Occasionally where lines have not been given, the mark
´ has been inserted to show that the quotation is in the lower half of a
page.

_Note_ 2. In the following list the number (1) after an edition of a
text indicates that the edition is supplied with a complete referenced
glossary or word-index, (2) that it has a complete glossary, but without
references and (3) that it has a partial glossary or word-index.

_Note_ 3. Some of the abbreviations given below are used in combination.
Examples: MtLR = the Lindisfarne and Rushworth MSS of St Matthew; BJPs =
the Bosworth and the Junius Psalters; asf. = accusative singular
feminine. EK = Early Kentish.

‘ ’ Quotation marks are used to enclose the English words which should
    be looked up in the _NED_ in order to find etymological
    information as to, and examples of the use of, the Anglo-Saxon
    words to which the articles in this Dictionary relate, see Note 1
    above. If they enclose Latin words, they indicate the lemmata of
    Anglo-Saxon words in glosses or glossaries etc., or the Latin
    equivalent of such words in the Latin texts from which they are
    translated. The Latin is especially so given when the Ags. word
    seems to be merely a blindly mechanical and literal equivalent.

* is prefixed or affixed to hypothetical forms. Normalised forms of
    Ags. words which actually exist are not usually so marked.

´ See Note 1 above.

+ = ge-.

± indicates that the Ags. word to which it is prefixed is found both
    with and without the prefix ge-.

† = occurs in poetical texts only.

‡ = occurs in a poetical text, and once only.

== This sign is used to indicate that the words which it follows,
    _and its compounds_, are to be found in the Dictionary under the
    heading given after it, thus meht==miht is equivalent to
    meht = miht _and_ meht- = miht-.


a. = accusative.

A = Anglian, or, if followed by numerals, Anglia, Zeitschrift für
Englische Philologie, Halle, 1877 etc. AB = Anglia Beiblatt.

Æ = Ælfric. (References followed by numerals in parentheses refer to
certain Homilies attributed to Ælfric in HL.) If followed by a book of
the Bible the reference is to that book in _Ælfric de vetere et novo
Testamento_ (Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, vol. 1).

#ÆGr# = Ælfric’s Grammatik und Glossar, ed. J. Zupitza, Berlin, 1880.

ÆH = Ælfric’s Homilies, ed. by B. Thorpe, London, 1844-6. (Quoted by
vol., page and line.)

ÆL = Ælfric’s Metrical Lives of Saints, ed. W. W. Skeat (EETS),
1881-1900 (3).

ÆP = Ælfric’s Hirtenbriefe (Ælfric’s Pastoral Letters), ed. B. Fehr,
Hamburg, 1914 (Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, vol. 9).

AF = Anglistische Forschungen, ed. J. Hoops, Heidelberg.

#Alm# = the poem on Alms, in #Gr#.

#An# = the poem of Andreas, in #Gr#; or ed. G. P. Krapp, Boston, U.S.A.,
1905 (1).

#Andr# = the prose legend of St Andrew, in J. W. Bright’s Anglo-Saxon
Reader, London, 1892 (1).

ANS = Herrig’s Archiv für das Studium der neueren Sprachen, Brunswick,
1846-1914.

#AnT# = Analecta Anglo-saxonica by B. Thorpe, London, 1846 (2).

anv. = anomalous verb.

AO = Alfred’s translation of Orosius, ed. H. Sweet (EETS), 1883.
(v. also Wfg.)

#Ap# = the poem of the Fate of the Apostles, in #Gr#; or included with
Andreas in Krapp’s edition (v. #An#).

#APs# = the Arundel Psalter, ed. G. Oess (AF vol. 30), Heidelberg, 1910.

#ApT# = Anglo-Saxon version of Apollonius of Tyre, ed. B. Thorpe,
London, 1834.

AS = King Alfred’s version of Augustine’s Soliloquies, ed. H. L.
Hargrove (Yale Studies in Old English), Boston, U.S.A., 1912 (1). See
also #Shr#.

#Az# = the poem of Azarias, in #Gr#.

B = the poem of Beowulf, in #Gr#; also ed. A. J. Wyatt and R. W.
Chambers, Cambridge, 1914 (1); or ed. W. J. Sedgefield, Manchester, 1912
(1); or ed. Harrison and Sharp, Boston, U.S.A., 1888 (1).

#Bas# = The Admonition of St Basil, ed. H. W. Norman, London, 1840.

BB = Bonner Beiträge zur Anglistik, ed. M. Trautmann.

BC = Cartularium Saxonicum, ed. W. de Gray Birch, London, 1883 etc., 3
vols.

Bd = Bede.

BDS = Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache, ed. E. Sievers,
Leipzig, 1874-1914.

BH = the Anglo-Saxon version of Bede’s Ecclesiastical History, 2 vols.,
ed. T. Miller (EETS), 1891-6. (Reference is usually made to the pages in
vol. 1 as regards the various readings recorded in vol. 2--not to the
pages in the latter vol.)

#Bk# = Texte und Untersuchungen zur AE Literatur, etc., by R. Brotanek,
Halle, 1913.

#Bl# = The Blickling Homilies, ed. R. Morris (EETS), 1874-80 (1).

#BlPs# = Blickling Glosses to the Psalms, at the end of #Bl#.

#Bo# = King Alfred’s translation of Boethius, with the Metres of
Boethius, ed. W. J. Sedgefield, Oxford, 1899 (1).

#BPs# = die AE Glossen im Bosworth-Psalter, ed. U. Lindelöf (Mémoires de
la Soc. néo-philologique à Helsingfors, tom. 5), 1909 (3).

BR = An Anglo-Saxon Reader, ed. J. W. Bright, New York, 1913 or London,
1910 (1).

#Br# = the poem of Brunanburh, in #Gr# or †#Chr#.

BT = An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, by J. Bosworth and T. N. Toller, Oxford,
1882-98. BTSup. = the Supplement to the above, Part #I# (A-EORÐ), 1908.

CC = The Crawford Charters, ed. by A. S. Napier and W. H. Stevenson
(Anecdota Oxoniensia), Oxford, 1895.

CD = the Codex Diplomaticus, ed. Kemble

  [[This citation occurs a few times in error for the author’s normal
  form, KC.]]

#Chr# = Two of the Saxon Chronicles Parallel, ed. J. Earle and C.
Plummer, Oxford, 1892 (1). The poetical passages are marked †#Chr#.

CM = the tract ‘de Consuetudine Monachorum,’ in Anglia, vol. 13, pp.
365-454.

#Cos# = Altwestsächsische Grammatik, by P. J. Cosijn, Haag, 1888.

cp. = compare.

CP = King Alfred’s trans. of Gregory’s Pastoral Care, ed. H. Sweet
(EETS), London, 1871.

Cp = the Corpus Glossary, in OET, or in WW (cols. 1-54) or (if the
numbers are followed by a letter), in A Latin-Anglo-Saxon Glossary, ed.
by J. H. Hessels, Cambridge, 1890 (1).

#CPs# = Der Cambridge-Psalter, ed. K. Wildhagen, Bibl. der Ags. Prosa,
vol. 7, Hamburg, 1910. (CHy = Cambridge Hymns in the same vol.) (3)

#Cr# = the poem of Crist, in #Gr#.

#Cra# = the poem of Men’s Crafts, in #Gr#.

#Creat# = the poem of the Creation, in #Gr#.

Ct = Charters, wills and other like documents, as contained in BC, CC,
EC, KC and TC.

d. = dative.   dp. = dat. pl.   ds. = dat. singular; etc.

#Da# = the poem of Daniel, in #Gr#; or ed. T. W. Hunt (Exodus and
Daniel), Boston, 1885.  [[Sometimes writen #Dan# in body text]]

DD = the poem ‘Be Dōmes Dæge’ (‘de die judiciæ’), ed. J. R. Lumby
(EETS), London, 1876 (1); or in #Gr# (vol. 2, pp. 250-272).

#Deor# = the poem of Deor’s Complaint, in #Gr# and #Kl#.

DHy = the Durham Hymnarium, ed. J. Stevenson (Surtees Society, vol. 23),
London, 1851. (#Gl#, by H. W. Chapman, Yale Studies, No. 24, Boston,
1905.)

#Dom# = the poem ‘Be Dōmes Dæge’ from the Exeter Book, in #Gr# (Vol. 3,
pp. 171-4).

DR = the Durham Ritual, ed. T. Stevenson (Surtees Society), London,
1840. Lines of Anglo-Saxon only counted. [#Gl# by Uno Lindelöf, Bonn,
1901 (BB vol. 9).]

_Du._ = Dutch.

E = Early.

EC = Land Charters and other Saxonic Documents, ed. John Earle, Oxford,
1888 (3).

EETS = Early English Text Society’s Publications.

EK = Early Kentish.

#El# = the poem of Elene, in #Gr#; or ed. Kent, Boston, 1889.

Ep = the Epinal Gloss., in OET.

#EPs# = Eadwine’s Canterbury Psalter, ed. F. Harsley, EETS, London,
1889. (EHy = Hymns in the same vol.)

Erf = the Erfurt Gloss., in OET.

ES = Englische Studien, Heilbronn and Leipzig, 1876-1914.

EWS = Early West Saxon.

#Ex# = the poem of Exodus, in #Gr# or in Hunt’s edition (v. #Da#). If
followed by two kinds of numerals = Exodus in _Ælfric de vetere et novo
Testamento_ in the Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, Vol. 1, Cassel, 1872.

exc. = except.

f. = feminine.   fp. = fem. plural.

FAp = the poem ‘Fata Apostolorum,’ in #Gr#.

FBO = Das Benediktiner Offizium, ed. E. Feiler (AF vol. 4), Heidelberg,
1901.

#Fin# = the poem of Finnsburg, in #Gr#, and most editions of Beowulf.

FM = The Furnivall Miscellany, Oxford, 1901.

FT = the poem ‘A Father’s Teachings,’ in #Gr#.

g. = genitive.   gs. = gen. singular.   gp. = gen. pl.; etc.

G = the Anglo-Saxon Gospels, ed. W. W. Skeat, Cambridge, 1871-87. See
also LG, NG, RG, WG. (#Gl# to WG by M. A. Harris, Yale Studies, vol. 6,
Boston, 1899.)

GD = Die Dialoge Gregors den Grossen, ed. Hans Hecht (Bibl. der Ags.
Prosa, vol. 5), Cassel, 1900-1907.

#Gen# = the poem of Genesis, in #Gr#. If followed by two kinds of
numerals = Genesis in _Ælfric de vetere et novo testamento_ (Bibl. der
Ags. Prosa, vol. 1, Cassel, 1872).

_Ger._ = German.

GK = Grein’s Sprachschatz der Ags. Dichter, revised by Köhler and
Holthausen, Heidelberg, 1912. (A complete referenced glossary to #Gr#.)

#Gl# = Glossary. Used also as a comprehensive sign for all or any of the
extant Anglo-Saxon glosses or glossaries: Cp, Ep, Erf, GPH, #HGl#,
#KGl#, Ln, OEG, WW etc.

#Gn# = The Gnomic Verses in #Gr#. #GnE# = those in the Exeter Book and
#GnC# those in the Cotton MS. Separate edition also by B. C. Williams,
New York, 1914 (1).

GPH = Prudentius Glosses, contributed by A. Holder to Germania,
Vierteljahrsschrift für deutsche Altertumskunde, vol. 11 (ns).

#Gr# = Bibliothek der Angelsächs. Poesie, ed. C. W. M. Grein and revised
by R. P. Wülker, Cassel, 1883-98.

#Gu# = the poem of St Guthlac, in #Gr#.

#Guth# = the (prose) Life of St Guthlac, ed. C. W. Goodwin, London, 1848
(pp. 8-98), or ed. P. Gonser (AF vol. 27), Heidelberg, 1909 (pp.
100-176).

#Hell# = the poem of Hell, in #Gr#.

#Hept# = The Heptateuchus, etc., Anglo-Saxonice, ed. Edw. Thwaites,
Oxford, 1698.

#Hex# = The Hexameron of St Basil, ed. H. W. Norman, London, 1849.

#HGl# = Glosses in (Haupt’s) Zeitschrift für deutsches Altertum, vol. 9
(1853).

HL = Homilien und Heiligendleben, ed. B. Assmann, Bibl. der Ags. Prosa,
vol. 3, Cassel, 1889. v. also Æ and #Shr#, (3).

#Hu# = the poem ‘The Husband’s Message,’ in #Gr#.

Hy = the collection of ‘Hymns’ at the end of most of the Ags. versions
of the Psalms. v. the various Psalters (#Ps#). [The numbering of verses
etc. usually follows that in Wildhagen’s Cambridge Psalter (#CPs#).]

i. = instrumental (case).

IM = ‘Indicia Monasterialia,’ ed. F. Kluge, in Techmer’s Internationale
Zeitschrift für allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft, vol. 2, Leipzig, 1885.

intr. = intransitive.

JAW = Eigentümlichkeiten des Anglischen Wortschatzes, by R. Jordan (AF
vol. 17), Heidelberg, 1906

JGPh = Journal of (English and) Germanic Philology, Urbana, Ill.

Jn = the Gospel of St John. v. G and NG (JnL = Lindisfarne MS; JnR =
Rushworth MS, v. LG, RG).

#JPs# = der Junius-Psalter, ed. E. Brenner (AF vol. 23), Heidelberg,
1909 (JHy = the Hymns in the same vol.).

#Jud# = the poem of Judith, in #Gr#, or ed. A. S. Cook, Boston,
1889 (1).

#Jul# = the poem of Juliana, in #Gr#.

K = Kentish.

KC = Codex Diplomaticus Aevi Saxonici, ed. J. M. Kemble, 6 vols.,
London, 1839-48.

#KGl# = Kentish Glosses to the Proverbs of Solomon (= WW 55-88, or, if
quoted by number, in #Kl#).

#Kl# = Angelsächsisches Lesebuch, by F. Kluge, 3rd edition, Halle,
1902 (2).

#KlED# = F. Kluge’s Etymologisches Wörterbuch, 7th edition, 1910, or
J. F. Davis’ translation, London, 1891.

_L._ = Latin.

#Lcd# = Leechdoms, Wortcunning and Starcraft of the Anglo-Saxons, ed.
O. Cockayne, London, 3 vols., Rolls Series, 1864-66 (vol. 2, and pp.
1-80 of vol. 3 are referred to by the folio of the MS, so that the
references may also be available for G. Leonhardi’s edition of that part
of the #Lcd#, in the Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, vol. 6) (3).

#Leas# = the poem ‘Be manna lease,’ in #Gr#.

Leo = Leo’s Angelsächsiches Glossar. Halle, 1877.

  [[Listing added by transcriber; used only in first edition.]]

LG = the Lindisfarne Gospels, in Skeat’s ed. of the Anglo-Saxon Gospels
(v. G). (Glossary by A. S. Cook, Halle, 1894.) LRG = Lindisfarne and
Rushworth Gospels. v. RG.

Lieb. = F. Liebermann (v. LL).

Lk = the Gospel of St Luke. v. G and NG (LkL = Lindisfarne MS; LkR =
Rushworth MS; v. LG, RG).

LL = the Anglo-Saxon Laws, as contained in Liebermann, Schmid or Thorpe.
If followed by numerals not in parentheses, or only partially in
parentheses, the reference is to ‘Die Gesetze der Angelsachsen,’ by
F. Liebermann, 2 vols., Halle, 1903-12 (1); if by numerals _entirely_ in
parentheses, to vol. 2 of ‘Ancient Laws and Institutes,’ by B. Thorpe,
2 vols., London, 1840 (3).

Ln = the Leiden Glossary, ed. J. H. Hessels, Cambridge, 1906 (1).

#Lor# = the Lorica Hymn, in Kleinere angelsächsische Denkmäler, by G.
Leonhardi (Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, vol. 6), Hamburg, 1905.

#LPs# = Der Lambeth-Psalter, ed. U. Lindelöf, Acta Soc. Sc. Fennicae,
vol. 35, Helsingfors, 1909 (1). (LHy = the Hymns in the same vol.)

LWS = Late West Saxon.

LV = Leofric’s Vision, ed. A. S. Napier, in the Transactions of the
Philological Society for 1907-10, pp. 180-188.

M = Mercian.

m. = masculine.   ms., mp., etc. = masc. sing., masc. plur., etc.

#Ma# = the poem of the Battle of Maldon, in #Gr#, also in #Br#, #Kl# or
Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon Reader, Oxford.

Mdf = Altenglisches Flurnamenbuch, by H. Middendorff, Halle, 1902. [See
Preface.]

#Men# = the Menologium, at the end of #Chr#.

#Met# = the Metres of Boethius; v. #Bo#.

MF = Festschrift für L. Morsbach (Studien zur Eng. Philologie, vol. 50),
Halle, 1913.

MFH = Homilies in MF, ed. Max Förster.

MH = An Old English Martyrology, ed. G. Herzfeld (EETS), London, 1900.
See also #Shr#.

_MHG._ = Middle High German.  [[Listing added by transcriber]]

Mk = the Gospel of St Mark; v. G and NG. (MkL = Lindisfarne MS; MkR =
Rushworth MS of St Mark; v. LG, RG.)

MLA = Publications of the Modern Language Association of America,
Baltimore.

MLN = Modern Language Notes, Baltimore, 1886-1914.

#Mod# = the poem ‘Bi Manna Mōd,’ in #Gr#.

MP = Modern Philology, Chicago, 1903-1914.

Mt = the Gospel of St Matthew; v. G and NG. (MtL = Lindisfarne MS; MtR =
Rushworth MS of St Matthew; v. LG, RG.)

n. = nominative, _or_ neuter, _or_ note. (np., nap., etc. = nom. plural,
nom. and acc. plur., etc.)

N = Northumbrian.

#Nar# = Narratiunculae, ed. O. Cockayne, London, 1861.

NC = Contributions to Old English Lexicography by A. Napier, in the
Philological Society’s Transactions for 1903-1906, London (mostly late
texts).

NED = the New English Dictionary, ed. Sir J. A. H. Murray and others,
Oxford, 1888-1915. (See Preface, and Note 1.)

neg. = negative.

NG = the Northumbrian Gospels, contained in Skeat’s edition (v. G, LG,
RG).

#Nic# = the Gospel of Nicodemus, in #Hept#; or in MLA 13·456-541. (The
references to passages are always to the latter edition.)

NR = The Legend of the Cross (Rood-tree), ed. A. S. Napier, EETS,
London, 1894.

obl. = oblique.

occl. = occasional, occasionally.

OEG = Old English Glosses, ed. A. Napier (Anecdota Oxoniensia), Oxford,
1900 (1).

OET = The Oldest English Texts, ed. H. Sweet, EETS, 1885 (1).

_OF._ = Old French.  [[Rare, and always written OFr. in text]]

_OHG._ = Old High German.

_ON._ = Old Norse.

_OS._ = Old Saxon.

p. = page, _or_ plural.

#Pa# = the poem of the Panther, in #Gr#.

#Part# = the poem of the Partridge, in #Gr#.

#Ph# = the poem of the Phoenix, in #Gr# or BR.

pl. = plural.

#PPs# = the Paris Psalter, ed. B. Thorpe, London, 1835. The prose
portion (Psalms 1-50) also ed. Bright and Ramsay, Belles Lettres Series,
Boston, 1907, and the remainder (verse portion) in #Gr#.

#Ps# = any one or more of the Anglo-Saxon Psalters. [NB. In the
numbering of the Psalms, the Authorised Version is usually one ahead
of the MSS.] v. A, B, C, E, J, L, R, S and VPs; also Hy.

  [[The occasional form #Pss# was retained. It may be either an error
  for #Ps# or short for “several Psalters”. In the one OED reference,
  two Psalters are quoted.]]

PST = Philological Society’s Transactions (v. also LV and NC).

QF = Mone, Quellen u. Forschungen zur Geschichte der teutschen Lit. u.
Sprache, Aachen und Leipzig, 1830.

RB = der Benedictinregel, ed. A. Schröer, Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, vol. 2,
Cassel, 1885-8 (3).

RBL = the Anglo-Saxon and Latin Rule of St Benet (Interlinear Glosses),
ed. H. Logeman, EETS, London, 1888.

#Rd# = The Riddles of the Exeter Book, in #Gr#, or ed. F. Tupper Junr.,
Boston, 1910 (1).

RG = the Rushworth Gospels, in Skeat’s ed. of the Anglo-Saxon Gospels
(v. G). Mt (all), Mk 1-2^15 and Jn 18^1-3 are in a Mercian dialect, and
are usually known as R^1; the rest (R^2) is in a Northumbrian dialect
(v. also LG). Glossary to R^1 by Ernst Schulte, Bonn, 1904; to R^2 by U.
Lindelöf, Helsingfors, 1897.

#Rim# = the Riming Poem, in #Gr#

  [[Listing added by transcriber. The Riming Poem is included in Grein
  along with many other texts from its original source, the Exeter MS.]]

#Rood# = the poem ‘Dream of the Rood,’ in #Gr#.

#RPs# = der Regius-Psalter, ed. F. Roeder (Studien in Eng. Philologie,
vol. 18), Halle, 1904. (RHy = the Hymns in the same vol.)

RSL = Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature, London.

#Ruin# = the poem of the Ruin, in #Gr#.

#Run# = the Rune-poem, in #Gr#.

s. = strong; also = singular.   sv. = strong verb.   swv. = strong-weak
verb.

#Sat# = the poem ‘Christ and Satan,’ in #Gr#.

sb. = substantive.

#Sc# = Defensor’s Liber Scintillarum, ed. E. Rhodes, EETS, London,
1889 (3).

#Seaf# = the poem of the Seafarer, in #Gr#.

sg. = singular.

#Shr# = the Shrine by O. Cockayne, London, 1864-70 [pp. 29-33 and 46-156
= MH; pp. 35-44 = HL pp. 199-207; pp. 163-204 = AS].

SHy = Surtees Hymnarium = DHy.

SkED = An Etymological English Dictionary by W. W. Skeat, Oxford, 1910.

#Sol# = the poem Solomon and Saturn, in #Gr# (if in italics, the
reference is sometimes to the prose version, ed. J. M. Kemble).

#Soul# = the poem of the Soul, in #Gr#.

#SPs# = Psalterium Davidis Latino-Saxonicum, ed. J. Spelman, London,
1640. (Stowe MS, but includes marginal readings from _APs_, _CPs_ and
_EPs_.)

Swt. = The Student’s Dictionary of Anglo-Saxon by H. Sweet, Oxford,
1897.

TC = Diplomatarium Ævi Saxonici, ed. B. Thorpe, London, 1865 (3).

tr. = transitive.

usu. = usual, usually.

v. = vide, _or_ very.

v.l. = varia lectio.

#VPs# = the Vespasian Psalter, as contained in OET (1). [VHy = Hymns at
the end of the Psalter.] Glossary also by Conrad Grimm (AF, vol. 18),
Heidelberg, 1906.

V^2Ps = Psalter-Glosses in Cotton Vitellius E 18 (noted by Wildhagen
in _CPs_).

w. = with.

W = (I) Wulfstan’s Homilies, ed. A. Napier, Berlin, 1883. Glossary by
L. H. Dodd, New York, 1908. (II) West Saxon.

#Wa# = the poem of the Wanderer, in #Gr#.

#Wald# = the poem of Waldhere, in #Gr#.

Wfg = die Syntax in den Werken Alfreds, by J. E. Wülfing, Bonn,
1894-1901 (copious material, and indexes to words in AO, BH, _Bo_, CP,
AS, _PPs_, etc.).

WG = West Saxon Gospels (v. G).

#Whale# = the poem of the Whale, in #Gr#.

#Wid# = the poem of Widsith, in #Gr#, or ed. R. F. Chambers, Cambridge,
1912.

#Wif# = the poem of ‘the Wife’s Complaint,’ in #Gr#.

WS = West Saxon.

Wt = An Old English Grammar by J. and E. M. Wright, 2nd edition, Oxford,
1914.

WW = Old English Vocabularies, ed. by T. Wright and R. P. Wülker,
London, 1884. Cols. 1-54 = Cp; 55-88 = #KGl#; pp. 89-103 = _Colloq.
Monast._ in NED.

Wy = the poem ‘Be manna wyrdum’ in #Gr#.

ZDA = Zeitschrift für deutsches Altertum, Leipzig and Berlin, 1853-1914.

ZDPh = Zeitschrift für deutsche Philologie, Halle, 1869-1914.




ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS

  [Transcriber’s Note:
  This section is included for completeness. All changes have been
  made in the text.]

ābrytan...#SPs# _should be_ ābrȳtan...#EPs#.

ācweorran: _for_ #SPs# _read_ #ELPs#.

æfest: for _Ei_ read _El_.

æfgerefa: _for_ LkL 12^42 _read_ LkL 12^58.

æfterlēan: _add_ #Gen# 76.

ælmesfeoh: add _LL_.

ærendung: add _RB_.

æscwiga: _for_ ‡ _read_ †.

āfaran: add _Da_ 6.

āgniend: _possession_ should be _possessor_.

āgniendlīc _should be_ āgniendlic.

āgryndan: _add_ #Men# 111.

āhwylfan: add _to roll to_ MP 1·592.

antemnere, antifonere (ÆP 154^6) = antefnere.

āsanian: _add_ LV 57.

āsprēadan: _for_ #CSPs# _read_ #EPs#.

āstīgnes: _for_ #SPs# _read_ #EPs#.

ātilian _should be_ ātillan.

ātlēag: _add_ EC 448^9.

ātorgeblǣd n. _swelling caused by poison_, #Lcd# 162b.

āðecgan: add _oppress?_ (Tupper) #Rd# 1^2,7.

āðynnian: _for_ VHy _read_ DHy 8^10.

āwarnian: _read_ (#APs#) = āswārnian.

+bearded _having a beard_, GD 279^14.

besārgung: strike out _sorrowing_, VHy.

besceawere: _for_ VHy _read_ DHy 24^15.

besencan: add _plunge into (fire)_, GD 317.

bīegan: _add_ +bȳged _bowed down, infirm_, #Nic# 471^29.

blīðe: _add_ (+b. occurs at #Guth# 161^9).

crūc: _add_ LV 74.

cwēme- = cwēm-

+dal n. _part_, GD 311^11.

dalmatice: _omit_ ? _and add_ GD 329^34.

+drēog II.: add _gentle (horse)_, GD 78^12.

ēðian _should be_ ±ēðian.

+fadung: add _rule, dominion_.

fǣmne(n)dlic (GD) = fǣmnhādlic

fǣrærning f. _quick marching_, GD 14^24.

fæsting f. read _commendation, trust, guardianship_, GD 239^15; LL
58[17].

fæstnung: add _exhortation_, MkL p2^5: _monument_, MtL p5^4; Mk 5^5.

fantbletsung f. _consecration of water for baptism_, ÆP 188^12.

feohtling: _add_ MP 1·610.

ferhtlic: _add_ #PPs# 95^10.

feriend: _add_ #Sol# 80.

flogettan: substitute _to fly, flutter_, #Sc#; GD 100^19.

folclic: add _worldly, secular_, GD 209^13.

fordēmednes: _add_ GD 345^3.

forecweden _aforesaid_, GD 12; 344.

forehūs: _add_ LV 33.

forewītung _should be_ forewitung.

forlætednes (GD 227^16) = forlætennes

forrǣda? m. _traitor, plotter_, MP 1·592.

forsegenlic (GD 233^21) = forsewenlic

forðfromung: _for_ #CSVPs# read #CVPs#.

forðman: _add_ NC 289.

forððēon _to profit_ (‘_proficere_’), GD 200.

fullfremed: _add_ -līce _after_ adv.

fullhāl _thoroughly well_, GD 248^1.

fyrdgestealla, fyrdgetrum: _add_ †.

+gang: add _passage (lapse) of time_, GD 179^10.

geadrung f. _text_, MtL p8^17.

geancyme: _delete second line of article_.

gearowyrdig: _add_ #Mod# 51.

gēodæd: add †.

geondflōwende _ebbing and flowing_, OEG 2363.

geondlācan: _add_ #Ph# 70.

geondsendan: omit †.

gest-: _for_ gǣst- _read_ gæst-

giestran: _add_ #Rd# 41^44.

glæsfæt: _add_ GD 10^16.

glōmung: for _VHy_ read _DHy_; GD.

godwebben: _add_ GD 176^1.

hæftnīednes: _add_ GD 346^22.

±hæftnīedan _should be_ +hæftnīedan.

hālettan _should be_ ±hālettan.

heals-iendlic, -igendlic: for #SPs# 89^13 read #APs# 89^13: _imploring_,
GD 17^23.

hellegæst: _strike out_ †.

hellegeat: _add_ MP 1·610.

hellestōw f. _infernal region, hell_, GD 332^10.

hīwcuðlic: add _familiar_, GD 32.

hnep (GD 186^27) = hnæpp

horsðegn: add _muleteer_, GD 191^23.

hrēðnes: _add_ ÆP 136^23.

hūselbox _receptacle of the host_, ÆP 178^6.

hwīlsticce: _add_ GD 254^24.

+hyldelic _secure, safe_, GD 348^10.

+īeðan: add _compassionate_, GD 216(ȳ).

Additional references to the NED:--bebod ‘_bibod_’; belūcan ‘_belouke_’;
cempa ‘_kemp_’; cennan ‘_ken_’; clipung ‘_cleping_’; cnæpp ‘_knap_’;
dihtere ‘_dighter_’; draca ‘_drake_’; dysgian ‘_dizzy_’; fǣcne
‘_faken_’; forhogian ‘_forhow_’; forwiernan ‘_forwarn_’; gafol
‘_gavel_’; glēaw ‘_glew_’; heonon ‘_hen_’; hlēo ‘_lee_’; hliehhan
‘_laugh_’; hrēof ‘_reof_’; hryre ‘_rure_’; huru ‘_hure_’; ierre
‘_irre_’; lūtan ‘_lout_’




A CONCISE

ANGLO-SAXON DICTIONARY




=A=


a prep. [= on] _on, at, in, to, for_.

ā I. (āwa, ō) adv. _always, ever, at all, continuously, for ever_, Æ,
AO, CP. ā on ēcnisse; ā butan ende _world without end_: _at any time_:
_in any degree_. [_ON._ ei, ey] II. f. = ǣ

ā- (unemphatic verbal prefix); I. orig. = _forth, away_, but as a rule
only intensitive in meaning. II. = on- III. ym(b)- IV. = ā (I.) in
pronouns and participles, and gives a sense of indefiniteness. V. = ǣ-

āǣlan = onǣlan

āǣðan = āīeðan

āb = ōweb

ābacan^6 _to bake_, ÆH 2·268^9.

ābǣdan _to compel, restrain, ward off_: _exact, take toll_: _force out,
extract_.

ābæligan = ǣbylgan

ābǣran _to disclose, bring to light_, DD 41.

ābære (W 274^24) = ǣbære  [[headword spelled “ǣbǣre”]]

ābærnan = onbærnan

abal (#Gen# 500) = afol

ābannan^7 _to summon, convoke, command_: _announce, proclaim_. ā. ūt
_call out, assemble_, _Chr_. [‘_abanne_’]

ābarian _to lay bare, disclose_.

abbad, abbod, abbot == abbud

abbud (a, o) m. ‘_abbot_,’ _BH, Chr_; Æ. [_L._ abbatem]

abbuddōm m. _abbatial jurisdiction_, BH.

abbudesse f. _abbess_, #Chr#.

abbudhād m. _abbatial rank, dignity_, LL.

abbudlēast f. _lack of an abbot_, BC 1·155´.

abbudrīce (o) n. _abbey, abbacy, office or jurisdiction of an abbot_
(used even of a convent of nuns).

ābēatan^7 _to beat, strike, break to pieces, make to fall_, _Cr_.
[‘_abeat_’]

ābēcēdē f. _ABC, alphabet_.

ābedecian (eðe-) _to get by begging or asking_, #Bo# 71^12.

abedisse = abbudesse

ābēgan = ābȳgan

ābelgan^3 _to make angry, irritate, offend_, _Sol_; Æ, AO, CP: _hurt,
distress_: _be angry with_. [‘_abelgen_’]

ābēodan^2 _to order, proclaim, bid, command, direct_: _summon, call
out_: _announce, relate, declare, present, offer_, _AO_; Æ. hǣl ā. _to
wish one good luck, greet, bid farewell to_. [‘_abede_’]

ābeofian = ābifian

ābēogan = ābūgan

ābeornan^3 _to take fire_, #PPs# 105^16.

ābēowan (WW 217^46) = ābȳwan

āberan^4 _to bear, carry_: _endure, suffer_, _Mt, Bo_; Æ, CP: _bear
(a child)_, Æ: _take away, remove_: _reveal_: (refl.) _restrain
oneself_: _do without_, NC 268.

ā-berd, -bered _crafty, cunning_.

āberendlic _bearable_.

ābernan (N) = ābeornan

āberstan^3 _to burst out, break out_, Æ, CP: _break away, escape_. ūt ā.
_break out_.

ābeðecian = ābedecian

ābicgan = ābycgan

ābīdan^1 _to ‘abide,’ wait, remain, delay, remain behind_, AO:
_survive_: _wait for, await_, Æ: _expect_, _Mt_ 11^3.

ābiddan^5 _to ask for, request, require, demand, pray, pray to, pray
for_, Æ: _get by asking, obtain_, Æ, AO, CP: _call out (an army)_.

ābifian (eo) _to tremble, quake, shake_.

ābilgð, ābilhð = ǣbylgð

ābiran = āberan

ābiring = ābyrging

ābisg-, ābiseg- = ābysg-

ābītan^1 _to bite in pieces, tear to pieces, devour, gnaw_, Æ, AO:
_taste, partake of, consume_.

ābit(e)rian _to turn bitter_, CP 341^24: _embitter_.

ābitt = ābit

ābītt = ābīt

  [[The first edition gives “ābit” as a form of “ābiddan”,
  “ābīt” as a form of “ābīdan” or “ābītan”.]]

āblācian _to become pale, grow faint_: _become tarnished_, CP 135^2.

āblǣcan _to bleach, whiten_, #BJPs# 50^9.

āblǣcnes f. _pallor, gloom_, #Lcd# 1·294.

āblǣcung f. _pallor_, #HGl# 518.

āblǣst _inspired, furious_.

āblāwan^1 _to blow, blow away, breathe upon_, _Æ_: _puff up, swell_,
_Lcd_ 93b. [‘_ablow_’]

āblāw-nes, -ung f. _inflation_, #Lcd#.

āblegned _ulcerated_, #Lcd#.

āblendan _to blind, put out the eyes of_, Æ, CP: _dazzle, deceive,
delude_, _Æ_. [‘_ablend_’]

āblēred _bare, uncovered, bald_. [blēre]  [[headword spelled “blere”]]

āblīcan^1 _to shine, glitter_.

āblicgan = āblycgan

āblignes = ǣbylgnes

āblindan _to make blind_, #Bl# 151^4.

āblindian = āblendan

āblinnan^3 _to cease, leave off, desist_, Æ, AO, CP.

āblinnednes f. _cessation, interruption_, A 5·465.

āblinnendlīce _indefatigably_, #HGl# 429^32.

āblinnendnes = āblinnednes

āblisian (Æ) = āblysian

āblissian _to make glad, please_, GD 335n.

āblongen = ābolgen, pp. of ābelgan.

āblycgan (i) _to grow pale_, Æ: _make afraid_.

āblynnan = āblinnan

āblysian _to blush_.

āblysung f. _blushing, shame_, RB 133^11.

ābodian _to announce, proclaim_, LkR 12^3.

ābolgennes f. _irritation_, WW 230^19.

āborgian _to be surety for_, LL: (w. æt) _borrow_.

āborian = ābarian

ābracian _to engrave, emboss_.

ābrǣdan I. _to spread out, dilate_: _stretch out_, Æ. II. _bake_, #Lcd#
44a.

ābraslian _to crash, crackle_, GD 236^12.

ābrēac pret. 3 sg. of ābrūcan.

ābrēat pret. 3 sg. of ābrēotan.

ābrecan^4 _to break, break to pieces, break down, conquer, capture,
violate, destroy_, Æ, AO, CP: _break away from_.

ābrēdan^3 _to move quickly, draw, unsheath, wench, pull out_, _Mt_:
_withdraw, take away, draw back, free from_, Æ, AO. ūp ābroden _drawn
up, raised up_: _start up, awake_. [‘_abraid_’]

ābredwian _to lay low, kill_, B 2619.

ābrēgan _to alarm, terrify_.

ābregdan = ābrēdan

ābrēotan^2 _to destroy, kill_.

ābrēotnes f. _extermination_, OET 182.

ābrēoðan^2 (intr.) _to fail, decay, deteriorate, perish, be destroyed_,
_Ma_; Æ. ābroðen (pp.) _degenerate, reprobate_, _ÆGr_. (tr. and wk.)
_destroy_. [v. ‘_brethe_’]

ābrerd- = onbryrd-

ābroðennes f. _baseness, cowardice_, W.

ābrūcan^3 _to eat_, A 11·1^17.

ābryrd- = onbryrd-

ābrȳtan _to destroy_, #EPs# 36^9.

ābūfan (= on-) adv. _above_, #Chr# 1090#e#.

ābūgan^2 (= on-) _to bow, incline, bend, submit, do reverence_, _B,
ChrL_; Æ: _swerve, turn (to or from)_, _deviate_, CP: _withdraw,
retire_: _be bent or turned, turn one’s self_. [‘_abow_’]

ābunden _unimpeded_.

ābūrod _not inhabited_, TC 162^28.

ābūtan, -būten, -būton. I. prep. acc. _on, about, around, on the
outside, round about_, _CP, ChrL, Æ_. II. adv. _about, nearly_, _ChrC_.
[= onbūtan; ‘_about_’]

ābycgan _to buy, pay for, requite_: _redeem_: _perform, execute_.

ābyffan _to mutter_, WW 447^24.

ābȳgan (ē) _to bend, deflect_: _subdue, bring low_: _convert_.

ābȳgendlic v. un-ā.

ābylg-, ābylig- = ǣbylg-

ā-byrgan, -byrian _to taste, eat_.

ābyrging (-iri-) f. _taste_.

ābysgian _to busy, occupy, employ_: _engage in, undertake_: _take up,
fill_, GD.

ābysgung f. _occupation_: _trouble_.

ābȳwan (ēo) _to rub off, polish, cleanse, purify_.

ac I. conj. _but_: _but also, moreover, nevertheless, however_:
_because, for_ (?): _and_ (?), #An# 569. ac gif _unless, except_, #Bl#
151. [_Goth._ ak] II. interrog. particle, _why, wherefore, whether_: in
direct questions = _L. nonne, numquid_.

āc f. gds. and np. ǣc ‘_oak_,’ _Æ, Ct, Lcd_; Mdf: (‡) _ship of oak_:
(w. nap. ācas) _name of the rune for =a=_. [_OHG._ eih]

ācǣgan = ācīgan

ācǣglod ‘_serratus_,’ #Nar# 20^26.

ācænn- = ācenn-

ācærran = ācirran

ācalan^6 _to become frost-bitten_, #Lcd# 2b.

acan^6 _to ‘ache,’ suffer pain_, _Æ_.

acas, acase f. (NG) = æcs

ācbēam m. _oak-tree_.

accent m. _accent_. [_L._]

accutian ?= ācunnian

āccynn n. _a kind of oak_, WW 430^6.

ācdrenc m. _oak drink, drink made from acorns_?, WW.

ace = ece

ācealdian _to become cold_, _Æ, CP_. [‘_acold_’]

ācēapian _to buy off, buy out_.

ācēlan _to cool off, still, quiet_, _Met_. [‘_akele_’]

ācelma = ǣcelma

ācen = ǣcen

ācennan _to bring forth, produce, renew_, _Bo, WG_; Æ: _attribute to_.
[‘_akenne(d)_’]

ācennedlic _‘genuinus,’ native_, OEG.

ācennednes (_WG_; _Æ_), -cennes (_CP, NG_; AO) f. _birth_.
[‘_akenn(ed)nes_’]

ācennend m. _parent_, DR 197^11.

ācennicge f. _mother_, DR.

ācenning f. _birth_, #Bk# 16.

ācēocian (tr.) _to choke_: (intr.) _burn out_.

ācēocung f. ‘_ruminatio_,’ WW 179^2.

āceorfan^3 _to cut off, hew down_, AO, CP. onweg ā. _to cut away_. of ā.
_to cut off_, AO.

ācēosan^2 _to choose_, AO, CP.

acer = æcer

ācerr- = ācirr-

ācīgan _to call, summon_.

ācirran (e, y) (tr.) _to turn, turn away or aside_: (intr.) _turn
oneself, go, return_.

ācirrednes v. onweg-ā.  [[headword spelled “onwegācyrrednes”]]

ācl = ācol

āclǣc == āglǣc

āclǣnsian _to cleanse, purify_, Æ.

āclēaf n. _oak leaf_, #Lcd#.

āclēofan^2 _to cleave_, EC 351^10.

ācleopian _to call out_, WW 378^5.

+āclian † _to frighten, excite_. [ācol]

āclungen _contracted_, WW 239^37. [clingan]

ācmelu n. _acorn meal_, #Lcd#.

ācmistel f. _mistletoe_, #Lcd#.

ācn- = ēacn-

ācnāwan^1 _to know, recognise, understand_.

ācnyssan _to drive out, expel_, #SPs# 35^13.

ācofrian _to recover_, _Lcd_. [‘_acover_’]

ācol † _affrighted, dismayed_.

ācōlian _to grow cold_, CP.

ācolitus m. _acolyte_, LL [_L._].

ācolmōd † _fearful minded, timid_.

+ācolmōdian _to cast down, sadden_, WW 209^16. [ācol]

ācordian _to make terms, reconcile_, #Chr# 1120.

ācorenlic _eligible, worthy of choice_, CP 409^36.

ācostnian _to try, test, prove_, CM, WW.

ācræftan _to think out, devise_, AO 46^29.

ācrammian _to cram_, WW 236^10.

ācrēopian _to creep, crawl_, Æ.

ācrimman^3 (y) _to cram, stuff_, WW.

ācrind f. _oak bark_, #Lcd#.

ācrummen pp. of ācrimman.

acs = æx

ācs- = āsc-

acse = asce

āctān m. _oak-twig_, #Lcd#.

āctrēo n. _oak-tree_, #Wif# 28^36.

ācucian (Æ) = ācwician

ācul = ācol

ācuma (Æ) = ācumba

ācuman^4 _to come, come forth (from)_, Æ: _bear, bring_: _endure,
withstand_, Æ: _get to or from, reach_, _Gen_. [‘_acome_’]

ācum-ba m., -be fn. _‘oakum,’ hards, tow_, _Lcd, OEG, WW_: _ashes of
oakum_: _parings, clippings_. [cemban]

ācumendlic _tolerable_, Æ: _possible_.

ācumendlīcnes f. _possibility_.

ācunnan (NG) = oncunnan

ācunnian _to try, test, prove_: _experience_, CP.

ācunnung f. _experience, trial_, GD.

ācusan _to accuse_, MtL 12^10 [_L._].

ācwacian _to tremble_.

ācwæncan = ācwencan

ācweccan (tr.) _to move, swing, shake, vibrate_, _Ma_; Æ: (intr.)
_quiver_, Æ. [‘_aquetch_’]

ācwelan^4 _to die, perish_, Æ, AO, CP.

ācwellan _to kill, destroy_, _JnL_; Æ, AO, CP. [‘_aquell_’]

ācwellednes (eæ^2) f. _slaughter_, #EPs# 43^22.

ācwencan _to quench, extinguish_, _Mt_; AO. [‘_aquench_’]

ācweorna m. _squirrel_, _Gl_. [‘_aquerne_’]

ācweorran^3 _to guzzle, gorge_, #ELPs# 77^71.

ācwern = ācweorna

ācwerren = ācworren pp. of ācweorran.

ācweðan^5 _to say, speak out, declare, utter, express, answer_, _Gen_:
_reject, banish_, #Gen# 304. [‘_acweath_’]

ācwician (tr.) _to quicken, vivify_, _Ps_: (intr.) _revive_, _BH_.
[‘_aquick_’]

ācwīnan^1 _to dwindle away, disappear, go out (of fire)_, BH, #LPs#.

ācwincan^3 _to vanish, be extinguished or eclipsed_.

ā-cwucian, -cwycian = ācwician

ācwudu m. _an oak wood_, KC 6·218^19.

ācwylan = ācwelan

ācwylman _to kill, slay_.

ācwylmian _to be tormented_, W 220^5.

ācwyncan = ācwencan

ācynned = ācenned pp. of ācennan.

ācyrr- = ācirr-

ācȳðan _to show, proclaim, reveal, announce, confirm, prove_.

ād mn. _heap, funeral pile, pyre_: _fire, flame_. [_OHG._ eit]

ādǣlan _to divide, separate_.

ādēadian _to fail, decay, mortify, become torpid or callous_, Æ.

ādēafian _to became deaf_, WW 179^25.

ādēafung f. _deafening, making deaf_, _Lcd_. [v. ‘_adeave_’]

ādel I. = ādl. II. = ādela

ādela m. _mud, dirt, filth, filthy place_, _Æ_. [‘_addle_’]

ādelfan^3 _to delve, dig, excavate_, Æ, AO, CP.

ādeliht _filthy_, WW.

ādelsēað m. _sewer, sink_, Æ.

ādēman _to judge, try, deprive of or exclude from by a legal decision_:
_try, afflict_.

ādeorcian _to become dull, obscure, tarnished_, CP: _grow dark_, W.

āderian _to hurt_, GD 219^19.

adesa m., adese f. _‘adze,’ hatchet_, _BH, W_.

ādexe = āðexe

ād-faru f. ds. -fære _way or path to the funeral pile_, B 3010.

ādfini n. _limit_? _ash-heap of a beacon_? EC 354^5.

ādfȳr n. _sacrificial fire_, #Ex# 398.

+ādgian = +ēadgian

ādihtan _to compose, write_.

ādihtian _to regulate, arrange, order_, CP.

ā-dīlegian, -dīl(i)gian (ȳ) _to destroy, blot out, annihilate,
devastate_, CP.

ādimmian _to become dim or dull, to darken, obscure_, CP.

ādl fn., ādle f. _disease, infirmity, sickness_, AO, CP.

ādlēg m. _flame of the funeral pile_, #Ph# 222.

±ādlian _to be diseased or ill, languish_, Æ: _cause disease_, DR.

ādlig _sick, diseased_, Æ.

ādliga m. _sick person_

ādliht = ādeliht

ādloma m. _one crippled by fire_, #Gu# 884. [lama?]

ādlsēoc _sick of a contagious disease_, ES 39·322.

ādl-ðracu ‡ f. gs. -ðræce _force of disease_.

ādlung f. _illness_, ÆH 1·122^31.

ādlwērig _weary from illness_, #Gu# 981.

ādōn (for conj. v. dōn) _to take away, send away_: _cast out, expel,
destroy_: (w. preps. _to, on, from, etc._) _put, place, take, remove,
set free_, AO, CP.

adosa = adesa

ādrǣdan = ondrǣdan

ādrǣfan _to drive away, shut out, expel_, AO, CP. [‘_adreve_’]

ādrǣnct = ādrenced pp. of ādrencan.

ādragan^6 _to draw (sword)_, HL 15^356.

ādrēfan = ādrǣfan

adreminte f. _feverfew_.

ādrencan _to submerge, immerse, drown_, AO. [‘_adrench_’]

ādrēogan^2 _to act, perform, do, practise_, _Æ_: _bear, suffer, endure_,
_An_; CP: _pass time, live_, Æ. [‘_adree_’]

ādrēogendlic _bearable_.

ādrēohan = ādrēogan

ādrēopan^2 _to drip, drop_, #An#.

ādrēosan^2 _to fall to pieces, decline, vanish, fail_.

ādrīfan^1 _to drive, drive away, drive out, pursue, follow up_, _LL_; Æ,
AO, CP: _stake out (a ford)_: _chase (metal)_, Æ. [‘_adrive_’]

ādrīgan = ādrȳgan

ādrincan^3 _be drowned, extinguished_, _BH_; AO. [‘_adrink_’]

ādrūgian, ādrūwian (_Mt, Æ_) _to dry up_. [‘_adroughe_’]

ādrȳgan (ī) _to become dry, dry up, wither_, CP: _dry, wipe dry_.

ādrysnan _to extinguish, repress_, NG.

adsa = adesa

adulsēað = adelsēað  [[headword spelled “ādelsēað”]]

ādumbian _to become dumb, keep silence_, _Mk_; Æ. [v. ‘_dumb_’ vb.]

a-dūn, -dūna, -dūne adv. _down, downward_, Æ. [= ofdūne]

adūne(ā)stīgan _to descend_, #CPs#.

adūnfeallan _to fall down_, #EPs# 144^14.

adūnweard adv. _downwards_, _ChrL_. [‘_a-downward_’]

ādūstrigan = andūstrian

ādwǣscan (ē) _to put out, quench, extinguish, blot out, destroy_, AO:
_suppress_, Æ, CP.

ā-dwelian _to wander, stray_.

ādwellan, pret. 3 sg. -dwealde _to seduce, lead astray_: _hinder_, Æ.

ādwēscan = ādwǣscan

ādwīnan^1 _to dwindle or waste away_.

ādȳdan _to destroy, mortify, kill_, _Æ_. [‘_adeaden_’]

ādȳfan _to overpower with sound_.

ādylf = ādealf pret. of ādelfan.

ādȳlgian, ādȳlegian = ādīlegian

ādymman = ādimmian

ādysgian _to make foolish_, W 185^12.

ǣ- accented verbal prefix, = (1) _without_; (2) ā-.

ǣ I. f. also ǣw f. (and m. or n.? in _NG_) _law (divine or human_),
_custom, covenant_, AO, CP; _WG, NG_. butan ǣ _outlaw_: (esp. in pl.)
_rite, ceremony_: _faith, religion_. unrihte ǣ _false religion_. Crīstes
ǣ _gospel_: _scriptures, revelation_: _marriage_, Æ: _(lawful) wife_.
For some comps. v. ǣw-. [‘_æ_’] II. = ēa I. III. interj. _oh! alas!_

ǣa I. = ēa I. II. gp. of ǣ.

æal- = eal-

ǣalā interj. = ēalā

ǣar- = ēar-

āeargian _to become remiss_, AO 212^20.

ǣbǣre (ē _LL_) _manifest, notorious, public, open, evident, clear_.
[‘_eber_’]

āebbian _to ebb away, recede_, #Chr#.

æbbung (= ebb-) f. ‘_ebbing_.’ sǣ æ. _gulf, bay_, _WW_ 154

ǣbebod n. _injunction of the law, command_, #PPs# 118^102.

ǣbēc fp. _books of the law_, WW 439^15.

ǣbēre = ǣbǣre

ǣbesn = ǣfesn  [[headword spelled “æfesn”]]

ǣbilg-, -bili(g)- = ǣbylg-

ǣblǣc- = āblǣc-

ǣblǣce _lustreless, pale, pallid_.

ǣbod m. _business_, Æ: _statute_.

ǣboda m. _messenger, preacher_, #Gu# 909.

ǣbræce = ǣwbræce  [[headword spelled “ǣwbrǣce”]]

ǣbreca = ǣwbreca

ǣbrecð f. _sacrilege_, #LPs#.

ǣbrucol _sacrilegious_, GPH 402.

æbs f? _fir-tree_, Æ. [_L._ abies]

ǣbylg n. = ǣbylgð

ǣbylga m. _anger_, #LPs# 77^49.

±ǣbylgan, -byli(g)an _to make angry, offend_, Æ.

ǣbylgnes f. _anger, offence_, Æ.

ǣbylgð, -bylgðu f. _anger_, AO.

ǣbylig- = ǣbylg-

ǣ-bylð, -bylygð = ǣbylgð

ǣc I. f. = āc. II. (N) = ēac

ǣcambe f. = ācumbe  [[under “ācumba”]]

ǣcan = īecan

æccyrn = æcern

æce = ece

ǣce = ēce

æced = eced

æcedwīn n. _wine mingled with myrrh_, MkL 15^23.

ǣcēlan = ācēlan

ǣcelma m. _chilblain_, OEG, WW.

ǣcelmehte (ecil-) _having chilblains_, OEG 1523.

ǣcen I. _a wood of oaks_. II. _oaken_, WW 270^14. III. = ēacen pp. of
ēacan.

æcer nap. æcras m. _field, sown land, cultivated land_, _Mt_; Æ, AO, CP;
Mdf: _a certain quantity of land, ‘acre,’_ _Æ_; v. LL 2·267: _crop_.

æcerceorl m. _countryman, farmer_, NC 268.

æceren = æcern

æcerhege m. _hedge of a field_, KC 3·33^2.

æcermǣlum _by acres_, KC 6·98^5.

æcermann m. _farmer_, _WW_. [‘_acreman_’]

æcern n. _nut, mast of tree_, _Æ_ (i^2): ‘_acorn_,’ WW.

æcernspranca m. _‘ilex,’ oak sapling_? #ÆGr# 69^15.

æcersǣd n. _seed enough for an acre_? #Chr# 1124.

æcerteoðung f. _tithe of the produce of the soil_, W 310^24.

æcertȳning f. _fencing_, EC 377^9.

æcerweorc n. _field-work_, GPH 391.

æces = æx

æcest, æceð pres. 2 and 3 sg. of acan.

ǣcilma = ǣcelma

æcirn = æcern

ǣclǣca = āglǣca

ǣclēaw = ǣglēaw

ǣcnōsle _degenerate, not noble_, WW.

+ǣcnōsliende _degenerating_, WW 218^12.

ǣcræft † m. _knowledge of law or ordinances, religion_.

ǣcræftig _learned in the law_; as sb. = _lawyer, scribe, Pharisee_.

æcras v. æcer.

æcren = æcern

æcs f. _‘axe,’ pickaxe, hatchet_, CP; _Mt_ (æx).

æcst, æcð pres. 2 and 3 sg. of acan.

ǣcumba = ācumba

æcur = æcer

æcyrf m. _(wood-)choppings_, BH 224^15.

æd (NG) = æt

æd- = ed-

ædderseax (WW) = ǣdreseax

æddre, ǣdr = ǣdre

ǣdre I. f. _artery, vein, pulse, nerve, sinew_, _B_; AO: pl. _veins,
kidneys_: _runlet of water, fountain, spring, stream_. [‘_eddre_’] II.
adv. _at once, directly, instantly, quickly_: (†) _fully, entirely_.
[_OS._ ādro]

ǣdreseax (der) n. _lancet_, WW 410^10.

ǣdreweg m. _artery, vein_.

ǣdrīfan = ādrīfan

ædwist = edwist

æfæst = æfest

ǣfæst = ǣwfæst

æfdæll -dell (NG) = ofdæle

æfdȳne m. _declivity_, #Gl#.

ǣfelle _without skin, peeled_, WW 190^31.

æfen = efen

ǣfen (ē) nm. _‘even,’ evening, eventide_, _B, MkL, Gu_ (ēfn). tō ǣfenes
_till evening_: _eve_, _RB_.

ǣfencollatio _the ‘collatio’ read before compline_, NC 268.

ǣfendrēam m. _even-song_, RB.

ǣfengebed n. _evening service_, WW 129^34.

ǣfengereord n. _evening meal, supper_ (often used in pl. of one meal).

ǣfengereordian _to sup, give supper to_, CM 1030.

ǣfengereordung f. _supper_, NC 269.

ǣfengeweorc n. _evening work_, #Lcd# 70b.

ǣfen-giefl, -gifl n. _evening repast, supper_, AO, CP.

ǣfen-glōm, -glōma m., -glōmung (omm-, eom-) f. _gloaming, twilight_.

ǣfengrom _fierce at eve_, B 2074.

æfenian = æfnian  [[headword spelled “ǣfnian”]]

ǣfenlāc n. _evening sacrifice, evening prayer_, #PPs# 140^3.

ǣfenlǣcan _to grow towards evening_, Lk 24^29.

ǣfenlēoht n. _evening light_, B 403.

ǣfenleoð † n. _evening song_.

ǣfenlic _of the evening_; adv. -līce.

ǣfenlof n. _lauds (service)_, CM 1035.

ǣfenmete m. _supper_.

ǣfenoffrung f. _evening sacrifice_, NC 269.

ǣfenrǣding f. _reading (during the evening meal at a monastery),
‘collatio,’_ CM.

ǣfenrepsung f. _nightfall_, Æ.

ǣfen-rest, -ræst † f. _evening rest_.

ǣfensang m. ‘_evensong_,’ _Æ, RB_.

ǣfensceop m. _evening singer, bard_, #Rd# 9^5. [scop]

ǣfenscīma m. _evening splendour_, #Gen# 2448.

ǣfensprǣc f. _evening talk_, B 759.

ǣfensteorra m. _the evening star, Hesperus_, _Bo_; Æ. [‘_evenstar_’]

ǣfen-tīd f., -tima m. _eventide_, Æ.

ǣfenðēnung f. _evening service_: _evening repast, supper_.

ǣfenðēowdōm m. _evening service or office_, WW 129^34.

ǣfenung = ǣfnung

ǣfer = ǣfre

æferðe f. _name of a plant_, #Lcd#.

æfes- = efes-

æfesa ? m., æfese (m.) f. = æfesn

æfesn, æfesen f. _relish, dainty, special pasturage, pannage_; _the
charge for special pasturage_, LL.

æfesne ?= æpsen?

æfest mf. _envy, hatred, malice, spite_, CP; _El, Ps_: _zeal, rivalry_.
[‘_evest_’]

ǣfest == ǣwfæst

æfestful _full of envy_.

±æfestian -igian _to be or become envious_.

æfestig _envious_: _zealous_.

æfestlīce = ofostlīce  [[under “ofost”]]

æfgælð f. _superstition_, OEG.

æfgerefa (-groefa) ‘_exactor_,’ LkL 12^58.

æfgrynde n. _abyss_, #PPs# 35^6.

æfhynde = ofhende

æfian (-an?) _to be in a miserable condition_, #Cr# 1357 (or æfnan?
Gollancz).

æfisc (EC 291) = efesc [[under “efes”]]

æflāst m. _a wandering from the way_? #Ex# 473.

±æfnan (e) _to carry out, do, perform, fulfil_: _cause_: _endure,
suffer_: (+) _hold, sustain_. [_ON._ efna]

æfne = efne

±ǣfnian _to grow towards evening_, Æ.

ǣfnung f. _‘evening,’ sunset_, _Æ_.

ǣfre adv. _‘ever,’ at any time_, _Sat, Mt_: _always, constantly,
perpetually_, _Cr, RB_; Æ, CP: _henceforth_: ne ǣ.; ǣ. ne (= nǣfre)
_never_; ǣ. tō aldre _for ever_. ǣ. ǣlc, _W, Chr_. ǣ. ǣnig _any at all_,
_KC_.

æfreda m. _what is taken or separated from_, OEG (Napier). [æf; *hreda
(hreddan)]: _tow, oakum_ (BT).

ǣfremmende _pious, religious_, #Jul# 648.

æfse I. = efes. II. = æbs

æfsecgan _to confute_, ES 42^163.

æfst == æfest

æfsweorc n. _pasturage_, WW 410^12 (= *æfesweorc).

æft = eft

æftan adv. _from behind, behind, in the rear_, _Ma_. [‘_aft_’]

æftanweard adj. _behind, in the rear, following_, #Rd# 63^5.

æftemest adj. _last, hindmost_, Æ, AO.

æfter I. prep. (w. d., i. and--chiefly N.--a.) (local and temporal)
_after, along, behind, through, throughout, during_: (causal)
_following, in consequence of, according to, for the purpose of_:
(object) _after, about, in pursuit of, for_. II. adv. _after, then,
afterwards, thereafter_: _thereupon, later, back_ (= _in return_). æ.
ðon, ðæm, ðisum; æ. ðæm (ðon, ðan) ðe; _afterwards, thereafter_.

æftera = æfterra

æfterǣ f. _the book Deuteronomy_, Æ.

æfterboren adj. _‘afterborn,’ posthumous_, _ÆGr_.

æftercweðan^5 _to speak after, repeat_. æftercweðendra lof _praise from
posterity_: _to renounce, abjure_, #Chr# 1094.

æftercyning m. _later king_, BH 140^24 B.

æfterealu n. _small beer_, WW 129^4.

æfterfilian = æfterfylgan  [[under “æfterfolgan”]]

æfterfiligend = æfterfylgend

æfterfolgere m. _follower_, AO 142^23.

æfter-folgian, -fylgan (AO) _to follow after, succeed, pursue_.

æfterfylgednes f. _sequel_, ÆL 23b^365.

æfterfylgend m. _follower, successor_, AO, -līce _in succession_.

æfterfylgendnes f. _succession_, SHy 11.

æfterfylgung (eft-) f. _pursuit_.

æfterfylig- = æfterfylg-

æfter-genga, -gengea m. _follower, successor_: _descendant_, Æ.

æftergengel m. _successor_, KC.

æftergengnes f. _succession_, Æ: _posterity_: _inferiority_.

æftergyld n. _further payment_, LL.

æfterhǣðe f? _autumn drought_, AO 102^7.

æfterhyrigan _to imitate_, BH.

æfterlēan n. _reward, recompense, restitution, retribution_, #Gen# 76.

æfterlic _second_, WW 505^19.

æfterra (comp.) _second, following, next, latter, lower_, CP.

æfter-rāp (Æ) -ræpe m. _crupper_.

æfterrīdan^1 _to ride after_.

æfterrōwan^7 _to row after_, ES 41^325.

æfterryne m. ‘_occursus_,’ #CPs# 18^7.

æftersang m. _(after-song), _matins_, CM 449.

æftersingallic (= -sanglic) _of matins_, CM 476.

æftersingend m. _succentor_, WW 129^23.

æftersona _soon, afterwards, again_, NG.

æfterspræc f. _after-claim_, LL 398^7.

æftersprecan^5 _to claim_, LL 226[9,4].

æfterspyrian _to track out, search, inquire into, examine_, CP.

æfterweard adj. _after, following, further, behind, in the rear,
later_, Æ.

æfterweardnes f. _posterity_, WW 464^18.

æfterwriten _written afterwards_, #Lcd# 69b.

æfterwyrcan _to cause, effect_.

æfter-yld, -yldo f. †_advanced age, old age_: _after age, later time_,
BH. [ield(o)]

æfteweard = æfterweard

æftewearde adv. _behind_.

æftra = æfterra

æftresta superl. _last_.

æftum adv. _after_, MtR 24^21.

æftyr = æfter

æfðanc, æfðanca (o, u) m. _insult, offence_: _grudge, displeasure,
anger_.

æf-weard (CP) -ward _absent_.

æfweardnes f. _absence_, #Bo#, GD.

æfwela f. _decrease of wealth_, #Lcd# 3·170^13.

æfwendla (WW 223^1) = æfwyrdla

æf-werdelsa, -wyrdelsa m. _injury, damage, loss_.

æfwyrdla, m. _injury, damage, loss_: _fine for injury or loss_.

æfwyrð(u) ? f. _degradation, disgrace_, RB.

ǣfyllende _fulfilling the law, pious_, #Cr# 704.

ǣfyn = ǣfen

ǣfyrmða fp. _sweepings, rubbish_. [feormian]

ǣg n. (nap. ǣgru) ‘_egg_,’ _Lcd, Lk, OET, Met_.

ǣg = īeg

ǣgan = āgan

æge = ege

ǣgen = āgen

ǣgera (K) dp. of ǣg.

ǣgerfelma f. _egg-skin_, #Lcd# 20b.

ǣgergelu n. _yolk of egg_, #Gl#. [ǣg, geolu]

ǣgflota m. _seafarer, sailor_, #An# 258. [īeg]

ǣggemang n. _egg-mixture_, WW.

ǣg-hwā mf., -hwæt, n. pron. _each one, every one, everything, who or
whatever_. ǣghwǣt neut. _anything_. [ǣg = āgi]

ǣghwǣr _everywhere, in every direction_, _Mk_; Æ: _in every case, in
every respect_: _anywhere_. [‘_aywhere_’]

ǣghwæs (gs. of ǣghwā) _altogether, in every way, entirely, wholly,
throughout, in general_.

ǣghwæt v. ǣghwā.

ǣghwæðer (ǣgðer, āðer). I. pron. _each or every one (of two or more)_,
_‘either,’ both_, _AO, Mt_ (gð). II. conj. ǣghwæðer (ge)...ge;
ǣgðer...and _both...and_; _as well...as_.

ǣg-hwanan, -hwanon(e), -hwannon, -hwanum, _from all parts, everywhere,
on every side, in every way_.

ǣg-hwār, -hwēr = ǣghwǣr

ǣghwelc = ǣghwilc

ǣghweðer = ǣghwæðer

ǣghwider _on every side, in all directions_: _in any direction,
anywhere_.

ǣghwilc adj. _each, every, whosoever, whatsoever, all, every one_, _Bo,
Met_. ǣ. ānra _each_. ǣ. ōðer _each other_, _Ma_. ǣghwilces _in every
way_. [v. ‘_each_’]

ǣg-hwonan, -hwonon (CP), -hwonene = ǣghwanan

ǣghwyder = ǣghwider

ǣghwylc = ǣghwilc

ǣgift f. (m? n?) _restitution, repayment_.

ǣgilde adv. _receiving no ‘wergild’ as compensation_, LL.

ǣgilt = ǣgylt

ǣglǣc == āglǣc

ǣglēaw _learned in the law_.

ǣglēca = āglǣca

ǣglīm m. _white of egg_. [līm]

ǣgmang (WW 4^89) = ǣggemang

ǣgmore f. _root of the eye, socket_? #Lcd# 3·98^5. [ēage]

ægnan sb. pl. _awns, sweepings, chaff_, #Gl#. [v. egenu]

ǣgnes = āgnes, v. āgen.

ǣgnian = āgnian

ǣgru v. ǣg.

ægsa = egsa  [[under “egesa”]]

ǣgscill (y) f. _eggshell_, #Lcd#.

ǣgðer = ǣghwæðer

ǣgweard f. _watch on the shore_, B 241. [īeg]

ǣgwern = ǣghwǣr

ǣgwyrt f. _dandelion_, #Lcd# 158b.

ǣgylde = ǣgilde

ǣgylt m. _sin, offence_. [ǣw, gylt]

ǣgype _without skill or cunning_ (BT), #PPs# 106^10.

æhher (MkR 4^28) = ēar

ǣhīw n. _pallor_, OEG 4897.

ǣhīwe _pallid_: _deformed_.

ǣhīwnes f. _pallor_, #Lcd# 1·294^3.

ǣhlȳp m. _breach of the peace, assault_, LL. [cp. æthlȳp]

æht == eaht

ǣht I. f. (rare in sg.) _possessions, goods, lands, wealth, cattle_,
_Mk_; AO: _ownership, control_. [āgan: ‘_aught_’ sb.] II. = ōht

āēhtan _to persecute_, LkL 21^12.

ǣhtboren _born in bondage_, RB 11^20.

ǣhte = āhte pret. sg. of āgan.

ǣhteland n. _territory_, BH 358^14.

æhtemann m. _tiller of the soil, serf, farmer_, Æ.

ǣhteswān m. _swineherd who was a chattel on an estate_, LL 449^7.

ǣhtgesteald n. _possession_, #Jul# 115.

ǣhtgestrēon n. _possessions_, #Ph# 506.

ǣtgeweald † mn. _power, control_.

æhtian = eahtian

+æhtle f. _esteem_, B 369.

æhtowe (LkR 2^21) = eahta

ǣhtspēd f. _wealth, riches_, #LPs# 103^24.

ǣhtspēdig _rich_.

ǣhtwela † m. _wealth, riches_.

ǣhtwelig _wealthy, rich_, #Jul# 18.

ǣhwænne = āhwænne

ǣhwǣr, -hwār = āhwǣr

  [[Printed on one line:
  ǣhwænne, ǣhwǣr, -hwār = āhwænne, āhwær]]

ǣhwyrfan = āhwierfan

æhx = æcs

æig = æg  [[error for “ǣg”?]]

æl- prefix = I. eal(l)-. II. el(e)-.

æl m. _piercer, ‘awl,’_ _Æ_.

ǣl m. ‘_eel_,’ _WW_; Mdf.

ǣlā = ēalā

ǣlǣdend m. _legislator_, #SPs# 9^21.

ǣlǣrende m. _teacher of the law, instructor in religion_, #El# 506.

ǣlǣte I. n. _desert place_. II. _desert, empty_, W 47^21. III. f.
_divorced woman_.

ǣlǣten I. = ālǣten pp. of ālǣtan. II. = ǣlǣte II.

ǣlagol _lawgiving_, GPH 397^363.

ǣlan _to kindle, light, set on fire, burn_, Æ, CP.

ǣlārēow (-lārua) m. _teacher of the law_, _Pharisee_, NG.

ælað = ealað

ælbeorht = eallbeorht

ælbitu (#Gl#) = ilfetu

ǣlc [ēlc, ylc (#VPs#); v. ‘_each_’] I. (pron. subst.) _any, all, every,
each (one)_, Æ, AO, CP. ǣlc...ōðrum _the one...the other_. II. (adj.
pron.) _each_, _Lcd_: _any_, _CP_.

ǣlceald † _altogether cold, very cold_.

ælcor = elcor

ælcra = elcra  [[under “elcora”]]

ælcræftig † _almighty, all-powerful_.

ǣlcuht (AO) ælcwuht n. _everything_.

æld = æled  [[headword spelled “ǣled”]]

æld- = ield-

ældewuta (NG) = ealdwita

ǣlecung = ōleccung

ǣled † m. gs. ǣldes _fire, firebrand_. ǣ. weccan _to kindle a fire_,
#Whale# 21. [_ON._ eldr]

ǣledfȳr n. _flame of fire_, #Ph# 366?

ǣledlēoma m. _fire-brand_, B 3125.

ælegrǣdig _greedy_, ÆL 18^213. [eall-]

ælegrēne (#RPs# 127^3) = eallgrēne

ælelendisc = elelendisc

ælemidde f. _exact middle_, Æ.

ǣlenge I. _lengthy, tedious, vexatious_, _CP_. [‘_elenge_’] II.
_weariness_.

ǣlengnes f. _tediousness_, #Sc#, WW.

ælepe ? _‘origanum,’ wild marjoram_, WW 299^19. [ælene? BT]

ǣlepūte f. _‘eel-pout,’ burbot_, _WW_.

æleð pres. 3 sg. of alan.

ǣleð, ǣlð = ǣled

ælewealdend = eallwealdend

ælf mf. (pl. ielfe, ylfe) _‘elf,’ sprite, fairy, goblin, incubus_, _B,
Lcd_.

ælfādl f. _nightmare_, #Lcd# 123b.

ælfæle = ealfelo

æl-faru, -fær f. _whole army, host_, #Ex# 66.

ælfcynn n. _elfin race_, #Lcd# 123a.

ælfer = ælfaru

ǣl-fisc, -fix m. _eel_, TC 242^11.

ælfitu = ylfetu  [[under “ylfet” (defined under “ilfetu”)]]

æl-fremed, -fremd, (el-) _strange, foreign_, Æ: (+) _estranged_, #LPs#
57^4: (w. fram) _free, separated from_, Æ.

ælfremeda (el-) m. _stranger, foreigner_.

ælfremedung f. ‘_alienatio_,’ RHy 5^14.

ælf-scīene (ī^2ȳ^2) † _bright as an elf or fairy, beautiful, radiant_.

ælfsiden f. _elvish influence, nightmare_, #Lcd# 120b.

ælfsogoða m. _hiccough (thought to have been caused by elves)_, #Lcd#
124b.

ælfðēodlīce = elðēodiglīce

ælfðone f. _nightshade_, #Lcd# 123b.

ælfylce (= el-) † n. I. _strange land_. II. _foreign band, enemy_.

ǣlhyd f. _eel receptacle_? _eel-skin_? (BT) LL 455^17.

ǣlic _(of the law), legal, lawful_, Æ. adv. -līce.

ælifn f. _sustenance_, #Gl#? (v. ES 42·166)

ǣling f. _burning_, Æ: _ardour_.

ǣling- = ǣleng-

æll- = æl-, eal(l)-, el(l)-

ælmes = ælmesse

ælmesæcer m. _ground of which the yield was given as alms,
first-fruits_, A 11·3^69.

ælmesbæð n. _gratuitous bath_, W 171^2.

ælmesdæd f. _almsdeed_, Æ.

ælmesdōnde _giving alms_, NC 269.

ælmesfeoh n. _alms_: _Peter’s pence, Romescot_, _LL_ [‘_almsfee_’]

ælmesfull _charitable_.

ælmesgedāl n. _distribution of alms_.

ælmesgeorn _charitable_, Æ.

ælmesgifa (y^3) m. _giver of alms_, W 72^4.

ælmesgifu f. _alms, charity_, W 159^20.

ælmeshlāf m. _dole of bread_, TC 474^23.

ælmeslāc _giving of alms_, NC 269.

ælmeslēoht n. _a light in church provided at the expense of a pious
layman_.

ælmeslic _charitable_: _depending on alms, poor_, -līce, adv.
_charitably_, OET. (Ct.)

ælmeslond m. _land granted in frankalmoigne_. [almes-]

ælmesmann m. _‘almsman,’ bedesman, beggar_, _Lcd_; Æ.

ælmespening m. _alms-penny_.

ælmesriht n. _right of receiving alms_.

ælmesse f. _‘alms,’ almsgiving_, _Da, Mt_; Æ, CP. [_L._ eleēmosyna]

ælmessylen (e^3) f. _almsgiving_.

ælmesweorc n. _almsdeed_, #Bl# 25^17.

ælmidde = ælemidde

ælmiehtig = ælmihtig

ælmihtig (ea^2, e^2) adj. ‘_almighty_,’ _B, Ps, TC_; AO, CP: m. _the
Almighty_.

ælmihtignes f. _omnipotence_, AS 59^13.

ælmyrca m. _one entirely black, Ethiopian_, #An# 432.

ælmysse = ælmesse

ǣlnet n. _eel net_, BH.

ǣlpig = ānlīpig  [[under “ānlīpe”]]

ælren adj. _of an alder tree_, _KC_ 7·316. [‘_aldern_’]

ælreord = elreord

ælsyndrig _separately_, LkR 2^3.

æltǣwe (ēo, ō) _complete, entire, perfect, healthy, sound, true_, Æ, AO,
CP: _noted_, _Æ_. [_Goth._ tēwa]. -līce adv.

ælðēod (ælðied-) == elðēod

æl-walda, -wealda = ealwealda  [[under “eallwealda”]]

ælwiht † m. _strange creature, monster_ [= *elwiht]; (in pl.) =
eallwihta

æmbern = embren

ǣmelle _insipid_, WW 429^30.

ǣmelnes f. _slackness, sloth_, Æ: _weariness, disgust_, WW.

ǣmen, ǣmenne (AO) _uninhabited, desolate, desert_.

ǣmenne _solitude_, AS 4^11 (v. Wfg 3).

ǣmerge f. _embers, ashes, dust_, _Lcd_; Æ. [‘_ember_’]

ǣmet- = ǣmett-

ǣmetbed n. _ant-hill_, #Lcd# 121b.

ǣmethwīl f. _leisure_, Æ.

ǣmethyll m. _ant-hill_, CP 191^25.

ǣmetian = ǣmtian

ǣmetta m. _leisure, rest_, CP. [mōt]

ǣmette f. _‘emmet,’ ant_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ.

ǣmettig (CP), -m(e)tig (Æ) _‘empty,’ vacant_, _Bl, Æ_: _unoccupied,
without employment_, _Æ_: _unmarried_, _CP_.

ǣmettigian = ǣmtian

ǣminde n. _forgetfulness_, #Lcd# 1·384´.

ǣmōd _dismayed, disheartened_, Æ, AO.

ǣmt- = ǣmett-

±ǣmtian _to ‘empty,’_ _Æ_: _to be at leisure, have time for_, Æ, CP.

ǣmtignes f. _emptiness_, GD 35^17.

ǣmūða m. ‘_cæcum intestinum_,’ WW 160^11.

ǣmynde = ǣminde

ǣmyrce _excellent_, WW 393^38.

ǣmyrie = ǣmerge

ǣmytte = ǣmette

ǣn == ān

+æn- = +en-

ænbrece = unbrece

ænd- = end-

ǣne (āne) _once, at some time_, _Æ, B_: _at any time_: _at once_.
[‘ene’]

æned = ened

ǣnes adv. _once_.

ǣnetre = ānwintre

ǣnett, ǣnetnes = ānet  [[under “ānett”]]

ǣnga = ānga

ǣngancundes _in a unique way_? (BT), #Lcd# 162b.

ænge = enge

ængel = engel

Ænglisc = Englisc

ænid = ened

ǣnig adj. pron. and sb. _‘any,’ any one_, _Mk, Jn_. ǣnige ðinga
_somehow, anyhow_. [ān]

ǣnigge = ānēage

ǣnigmon _any one, some one_, NG.

ǣniht = āwuht

ǣninga = ānunga

ænlǣnan = onlǣnan

ǣnlefan = endlufon  [[under “endleofan”]]

ǣnlēp- = ānlēp-

ǣnlic _one_, _‘only,’ singular, solitary_, _Ps_; Lk: _unique, glorious,
noble, splendid, excellent_, _Bo_; Æ, AO. adv. -līce.

ǣnlīpig (Æ) = ānlīpig  [[under “ānlīpe”]]

ǣnne (AO, CP) v. ān.

ǣnote _useless_, LL 254[3,34].

ǣnrǣdnis = ānrǣdnes

ǣnyge = ānēage

ǣnytte = ǣnette  [[form of “ǣnett”?]]

æpl == æppel

æpled = æppled

æppel m. (nap. æpplas, rarely ap(p)la, æppla) _any kind of fruit, fruit
in general_: ‘_apple_,’ _CP, Gen_: _apple of the eye, ball, anything
round_, _Bo, CP, Sol_.

æppelbǣre † _fruit-bearing_: _apple-bearing_.

æppelbearu m. _orchard_, #PPs# 78^2.

æppelberende _apple-bearing_, DR 98^16.

æppelcynn n. _kind of apple_, #Lcd# 67a.

æppelcyrnel n. _apple pip_, WW 440^23.

æppelfæt n. _apple-vessel_, ZDA 31·15^401.

æppelfealu _apple-yellow, bay_, B 2165.

æppelhūs n. _fruit storehouse_, WW.

æppelscealu f. _apple-core_, WW 371^1.

æppelscrēad n. (only in pl.) _apple-parings_, WW 118^1.

æppeltrēow n. ‘_apple-tree_,’ _WW_.

æppeltūn m. _apple or fruit garden, orchard_, Æ, CP.

æppelðorn m. _crab-apple tree_, BC 3·93´.

æppelwīn n. _cider_, WW 430^9.

æppled † _shaped like an apple, round, embossed_, _El_. [‘_appled_’]

æppul- = apul-

æps == æsp, æbs

æpsen _shameless_, OEG 7^301.

æpsenes f. _disgrace_.

ǣr I. adv. comp. ǣror; sup. ǣrost, ǣr(e)st _‘ere,’ before that, soon,
formerly, beforehand, previously, already, lately, till_; (comp.)
_sooner, earlier_; (sup.) _just now, first of all_, _OET, Jn, El_:
_early, prematurely_, _Gu, Mk_. on ǣr; ǣr ðissum _previously, formerly,
beforehand_, _CP_. tō ǣr _too soon_. ǣr oððe æfter _sooner or later_.
hwonne ǣr _how soon? when?_ hwēne ǣr _just before_. on ealne ǣrne mergen
_very early in the morning_. ne ǣr ne siððan _neither sooner nor later_.
ǣr and sið _at all times_. II. conj. _‘ere,’ before that, until_, Æ, AO,
CP. ǣr ðam(ðe) _before_, _B_. III. prep. (w. d.) _before_. IV. adj. only
in comp. and sup. (ǣrra, ǣrest) q.v. V. f. = ār f. VI. n. = ār n.

ǣr- = I. _early, former_. II. intensitive prefix.

ǣra I. m. _scraper, strigil_, #Gl#. II. = ǣrra

ǣrǣt m. _excessive_ (or _too early_?) _eating_.

ærbe- = yrfe-, ierfe-

ǣrbeðoht _premeditated_.

ǣrboren _earlier born, first-born_ (or ? two words), #Gen# 973.

ærc = earc

ærce == arce

ǣrcwide m. _prophecy_? #Mod# 4.

ǣrdǣd f. _former deed_.

ǣrdæg m. (nap. ǣrdagas) _early day, early morn, dawn_: in pl. _former
days, past times_, AO.

ǣrdēað m. _premature death_, #Ex# 539.

ærdian = eardian

ærdon = ærndon? from ærnan (Grein), #Ma# 191.

ærdung = eardung

ǣre I. = ȳre. II. in comp. = _-oared_.

ǣrēafe (= ǣ^2) _detected_, TC 230^16.

ǣreldo ‘_anteritus_,’ WW 347^12.

ǣren _made of brass, brazen_, Æ, AO, CP: _tinkling_? [ār; cp. _Ger._
ehern]

ǣrendbōc f. _message, letter_.

ǣrenddraca (AO, CP) = ǣrendraca

ǣrende n. _‘errand,’ message_, _BH, Gu_; AO: _mission_, _An, Chr_:
_answer, news, tidings_, Æ.

ǣrendfæst _commissioned with an errand_, ÆL 26^221.

ǣrendgāst m. _angel_, #Gen# 2296.

ǣrendgewrit n. _written message, letter_, Æ, CP.

±ǣrendian _to go on an errand, carry a message, send word to_, CP:
_intercede_, _BH_; Æ: (+)_speed, succeed_, W 238^9. [‘_ernde_’]

ǣrendraca m. _messenger, apostle, ambassador, angel_, Æ, AO:
_representative, substitute, proxy_, BH 276^19.

ǣrendscip n. _skiff, small boat_.

ǣrendsecg m. _messenger_, #Gen# 658.

ǣrendsprǣc f. _message_, #Rd# 61^15.

ǣrendung f. _errand_: _errand-going_, _RB_. [‘_ernding_’]

ǣrend-wraca (AO) -wreca, (CP) = ǣrendraca

ǣrendwrit = ǣrendgewrit

ǣrenscip = ǣrendscip

ǣrer = ǣror

ǣrest I. adv. and superl. adj. _first, at first, before all_, Æ, CP. ðā,
ðonne, siððan ǣ. _as soon as_. ǣ. ðinga _first of all_. II. = ǣrist

ǣrfæder m. _forefather_, B 2622.

ǣrfæst == ārfæst

ærfe == ierfe, yrfe

ǣrgedōn _done before_, CP.

ǣrgefremed _before committed_.

ǣrgelēred _previously instructed_, MtL 14^8.

ǣrgenemned, -gesæd = ǣrnemned

ǣrgestrēon † n. _ancient treasure_.

ǣrgeweorc † n. _ancient work, work of olden times_.

ǣrgewinn n. _former strife or trouble, old warfare_, #Cross# 19.

ǣrgewyrht † n. _former work, deed of old_.

ǣrglæd _very bright_, #Ex# 293.

ǣrgōd † _good from old times_?, _very good_.

ǣrhwīlum † _erewhile, formerly_.

ærian = erian

ærig (OET) = earh

ǣriht † n. _code of law or faith_.

ǣring f. _day-break, early morning_ (A).

ǣrisc = ēarisc

ǣrist I. (ē) mfn. _rising_, _VPs_: _resurrection, awakening_, _Jn_; CP.
[‘_arist_’] II. = ǣrest

ǣrlēof? _very dear_, OEG 56^296.

ǣrlēst = ārlēast

ǣrlic(ā) adj.; -līce adv. ‘_early_,’ _Jn_.

ǣrlyft f. _early morning air_, WW 415^13.

ærm = earm

ǣrmorgen (a^1, a^2, e^2) m. _early morning, dawn, day-break_.

ǣrmorgenlic _of early morning_, DR.

ærn n. _dwelling, habitation, house, building, closet_.

ǣrn = ǣren

ærnan _to ‘run,’ ride, gallop_, _BH_: (+) _to ride, run to, reach, gain
by running or riding_, _AO_: = +iernan

ærndian = ærendian  [[headword spelled “ǣrendian”]]

ǣrne-mergen, -merigen (Æ) = ǣrmorgen

ǣrnemergenlic _matutinal_, CM 277.

ǣrnemned _aforementioned_.

ærneweg m. _road for riding on, race-course_. [iernan]

ærnian = earnian

ærning f. _‘running,’ riding, racing_, _Bo, GD_: _flow of blood_, _MtL_
9^20. (iorn-)

ærnð = ernð

ærnðegen (?) m. _house-officer_, #Gl#.

ærnung = earnung

ǣron = ǣrran  [[form of “ǣrra”]]

ǣror I. adv. _earlier, before, beforehand, formerly_, Æ, AO: _rather_.
II. prep. (w. d.) _before_.

ǣrost = ǣrest

ǣrra m. ǣrre fn. adj. _earlier, former_, _Bo, El_; CP. on ǣrran dæg _the
day before yesterday_. [‘_ere_,’ ‘_erer_’]

ǣrror = ǣror

ærs = ears

ǣrsceaft ‡ f. _old work, ancient building_.

ærschen, ærshen = erschen

ǣrst = ǣrest

ǣrstæf = ārstæf

ǣr-ðam, -ðon, -ðamðe v. ǣr.

ærð- = yrð-

ǣrwacol _early awake_, Æ.

+ærwe _depraved, wicked_, #EPs# 100^4.

ǣrwela m. _ancient wealth_, B 2747.

ǣrworuld f. _ancient world_, #Cr# 937.

ǣrynd = ǣrend  [[headword spelled “ǣrende”]]

ǣryr = ǣror

ǣryst I. = ǣrist. II. = ǣrest

ǣs n. _food, meat, carrion_: _bait_. [_OHG._ ās]

æsc I. m. nap. ascas _‘ash’-tree_, _Gl, KC_; Mdf: _name of the rune for
=æ=_: (†) _spear, lance_: _ship_, Æ. II. = æcs

ǣscære _unshorn, untrimmed_. [scieran]

ǣscan _to demand (legally)_, LL 177´.

ǣscapo (WW 273^36) = ǣsceapa

æscberend † m., -bora † m. _spear-bearer, soldier_.

æscberende _spear-bearing_, #Gen# 2041.

æsce = asce

ǣsce f. _asking, inquiry, search_, _LL_: _claim (to insurance money for
theft of cattle)_, LL 175^2. [‘_ask_’ sb.]

ǣsceap (ē^1) n. _remnant, patch_.

æsceda fpl. _refuse_? WW 148^33.

æscegeswāp n. _cinders, ashes_, TC 318^33.

æscen I. fm. _vessel of ash-wood, bucket, pail, bottle, cup_. II. adj.
_made of ash-wood, ashen_, #Lcd#.

æscfealu _ashy-hued_, WW 204^23.

æscgræg _ashy gray_, WW 204^24.

æschere m. _naval force_, #Ma# 69.

æscholt † n. _spear of ash-wood, spear-shaft, lance_ (v. also Mdf).

ǣscian = ācsian  [[under “āscian”]]

æscmann m. _ship-man, sailor, pirate_. [æsc]

æscplega m. _play of spears, battle_, #Jud# 217.

æscrind f. _bark of the ash-tree_, #Lcd#.

æscrōf † _brave in battle_.

æscstede m. _place of battle_, #Mod# 17; Mdf.

æscstederōd f. _cross marking a battlefield_? Ct (BT).

æsctīr m. _glory in war_, #Gen# 2069.

æscðracu f. _battle_, #Gen# 2153.

æsc-ðrote, -ðrotu f. _a plant, ferula_? _vervain_?

ǣsmæl _smallness of the eye_, #Lcd#.

ǣsmogu np. _slough (of snake)_ #Lcd# 88a. [ā-smūgan]

æscwert = æscwyrt

æscwiga † m. _(spear-) warrior_.

æscwlanc † _brave_.

æscwyrt f. _verbena, vervain_.

ǣscyldian ‘_delinquere_,’ #PPs#.

ǣsellend (y^2) m. _lawgiver_.

æsil = hæsel

æslitend m. _law-breaker_, #LPs#.

æsne- = esne-

æsp = æspe I.

æspe I. f. _aspen-tree, white poplar_, #Gl#; Mdf. [‘_asp_^1’] II. = æbs

æspen adj. _aspen_.

ǣspreng, ǣspring(e) = ǣspryng

æsprind (ps) f. _aspen, bark_, _Lcd_. [‘_asp_’]

ǣspringnes = āsprungenes  [[headword spelled “āsprungennes”]]

ǣspryng nf. _spring, fountain_, CP. [ēa]: _departure_, #Creat# 77.

ǣst I. = ǣrest. II. = ēst

ǣstǣnan = āstǣnan

ǣstan = ēastan

æstel m. _book-marker_, CP 9. [_L._ hastula]

æsul = esol

ǣswǣpe sbpl. _sweepings, rubbish_.

ǣswic m. _offence, stumbling-block, infamy, seduction, deceit_.

ǣswica, ǣswicend m. _offender, deceiver, hypocrite, traitor_.

ǣswice m. _violation of God’s laws_ (or? _adultery_), W 164^3.

±ǣswician _to offend, deceive_, Æ: _apostatize_, WW 342^12: _desert_, Æ.

ǣswicnes f. _stumbling-block_, #LPs# 105^36.

ǣswicung f. _offence, stumbling-block_, Æ: _deceit_, Æ: _sedition_.

ǣswind _idle, slothful_, WW 422^13. [swīð]

ǣsyllend = ǣsellend

æt I. prep. (w. d. and, more rarely, a.) (local) _‘at,’ near, by, in,
on, upon, with, before, next to, as far as, up to, into, toward_:
(temporal) _at, at the time of, near, in, on, to, until_: (causal) _at,
to, through_: (source) _from_: (instrumental) _by_. æt fēawum wordum _in
few words_, BH: _in respect to, as to_. II. adv. _at, to, near_. æt
nehstan, æt siðestan _finally_. æt- in composition = _at, to, from_.

ǣt I. mfn. _eatables, food, meat, flesh_, _Gu_; Æ, AO. ǣt and wǣt _food
and drink_, Æ: _the act of feeding, eating_, _PPs_; MkL (ē). [‘_eat_’
sb.] II. pret. 3 sg. of etan.

ǣt- = āte-

-ǣta v. self-ǣta.

ætǣwian = ætīewan

āetan^5 _to eat, devour_, AS 17^16; 37^5.

ætbēon anv. _to be present_.

ætberan^4 _to carry to, bring, produce, show_, _Da_: _carry off_, _B_.
[‘_atbear_’]

ætberstan^3 _to break out, or away, escape from_, _Æ_. [‘_atburst_’]

ætbrēdan = ætbregdan

ætbrēdendlic _ablative_, #ÆGr# 23^7.

æt-bregdan, -brēdan^3 _to take away, carry off, deprive of, snatch away,
draw off, withdraw_, _Mt_; Æ: _release, rescue, enlarge_: _prevent_, ÆL
31^126. [‘_atbraid_’]

ætclifian _to adhere_, #BJPs# 101^6.

ætclīðan _to adhere_, OET 181.

ætdēman _to refuse, give judgment against_, EC 202.

ætdōn anv. _to take away, deprive_.

ǣte = āte

ætēaca (eth-) m. ‘_appendix_,’ OEG 53^18.

ætēacnes = ætȳcnes

ætealdod _too old_, Æ (2^159).

ætēaw- = ætīew-, ætȳw-

ætēcan = ætȳcan

ætegār = ætgār  [[under “ætgǣre”]]

æteglan _to harm_, #PPs# 88^19.

ætēode pret. 3 sg. of *ætgān _he came_.

ǣteorian = āteorian  [[headword spelled “ātēorian”]]

ætēow- = ætīew-, ætȳw-

ætercyn = atorcyn  [[headword spelled “ātorcyn”]]

ǣtere (ē^1) m. _‘eater,’ glutton_, _Prov_; NG.

ǣtern I. (NG) _viper_. II. = ǣtren

ætēw- = ætīew-, ætȳw-

ætfæstan (= oð-) _to inflict on, afflict with_: _fasten to, drive into,
impart to_, CP 115^19: _commit, entrust_: _marry to_.

ætfæstnian _to fasten_? _entrust_? AS 21^19.

ætfaran^6 _to escape_, #Shr# 14^23.

ætfeallan^7 _to fall, fall out_: _fall away, fail, be reduced_, _LL_; Æ:
_happen_. [‘_atfall_’]

ætfele m. _adhesion_, #PPs# 72^23.

ætfeng m. _attaching, distraint_ v. LL 2·279.

ætfeohtan^2 † _to grope about_.

ætfēolan^3 _to stick to_: _adhere, apply oneself to, continue in_, CP.

ætfeorrian _to take from_, #Sc# 160^7.

ætferian _to carry away, bear off_.

ætfīlan = ætfēolan

ætflēon^2 _to flee away, escape by flight_, _Æ_. [‘_atflee_’]

ætflōwan^7 _to flow together, accumulate_, #SPs# 61^10.

ætfōn^7 _to seize upon, lay claim to_, _LL_. [‘_atfong_’]

ætforan I. prep. w. d. _before, in the presence of, in front of, close
by_, _Jn_; Æ. [‘_atfore_’]. II. adv. _beforehand_ (time).

ætfyligan, -fylgan _to adhere, cling to_.

æt-gædere (AO), -gæddre (CP), -gædre, -gæderum adv. _together, united,
at the same time_. [gadrian]

æt-gǣre n., -gār m. _spear, dart, javelin_, #Gl#.

ætgangan^7 _to go to, approach_, _Az_ 183. [‘_atgo_’]

ætgeddre, -gedre = ætgædere

ætgenumen _removed, taken away_, WW 529^39.

ǣtgiefa † (eo, i) m. _food-giver, feeder_.

ætgifan^5 _to render, give_, B 2878.

ætglīdan^1 _to slip away, disappear_, OEG 7^132.

ætgrǣpe _seizing_. æ. weorðan _seize_, B 1268.

æthabban _to retain_, Æ.

æthealdan^7 _to keep back_, #Sc# 109^18.

æthebban^6 _to take away, take out, hold back_, Æ: _exalt oneself_, CP
113^13.

æthindan prep. w. d. _behind, after_, _Chr_; Æ. [‘_athinden_’]

æthlēapan^7 _to run away, flee, escape_, W 162^5.

æthlȳp m. _assault_. [cp. ǣhlȳp]

æthrīnan^1 _to touch, move_, _Mt_; Æ. [‘_atrine_’]

æthrine m. _touch_.

æthwā _each, every one_.

æthwāre _somewhat_, #HGl# 421^37.

æt-hwega, -hwæga, -hweg(u) adv. _somewhat, tolerably, a little_: _how_.

æthweorfan^3 _to return, go back_, B 2299.

æthwōn adv. _almost, nearly_.

æthȳd ‘_eviscerata_,’ (_skinned_? BT), WW 392´.

ætiernan^3 _to run away_, _Æ_. [‘_atrin_’]

ætīewan (oð-; ē, ēa, ēo, ī, ȳ) pret. sg. -īe(w)de, (tr.) _to show,
reveal, display, disclose, manifest_, _Mt_ (ȳ), CP: (intr.) _show
oneself, become visible, appear_, _Mt_ (ȳ). [‘_atew_’]

ǣting f. _eating_, #Sc# 170^45 (ē): _pasture_? Mdf.

ǣtinge (y^2) _speechless_, OEG 46^45.

ætis pres. 3 sg. of ætwesan, ætbēon.

ætīw- = ætīew-, ætȳw-

ætlǣdan (= oð-) _to drive away_, _Æ_. [‘_atlead_’]

ǣtlic adj. _eatable_, WW, LkL (ē).

ætlicgan^5 _to lie idle_, _ÆGr_ 2^22. [‘_atlie_’]

ætlimpan^3 _to fall away from, escape, be lost_, Æ.

ætlūtian _to lurk, hide_, _Æ_. [‘_atlutien_’]

ætnēhstan (ȳ) adv. _at last_.

ætnes f. _edibility_, WW 226^11.

ætniman^4 _to take away, deprive of_, #Ex# 414.

ætol = etol

ǣton pret. pl. of etan.

ǣtor = ātor

ǣtorcynn = ātorcynn  [[headword spelled “ātorcyn”]]

ǣtran = ǣtrian

ætreccan w. d. and a. _to declare forfeit, deprive of_, #Lcd#.

ǣtren _poisoned, poisonous_, _MtL_ (-ern). [‘_attern_’]

ǣtrenmōd _of venomous spirit, malignant_ (or? two words), #GnE# 163.

ǣtrennes f. _poisonous nature_, #Lcd# 55a.

±ǣtrian _to poison_, _AO_: _become poisonous_. [‘_atter_’]

ætrig _poisonous_, _Lcd_; Æ. [‘_attery_’]

ætrihte (y) I. adj. _right at, near, present, at hand_. II. adv.
_almost, nearly_.

ætsacan^6 _to deny_, _Lk_; Æ: _renounce_, _Mk_. [‘_atsake_’]

ætsamne (æ, e, o) adv. _united, together, at once_, AO.

ætscēotan^2 _to escape, disappear_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

ætscūfan^2 _to shove away_.

ætsittan^5 _to sit by, remain, stay_, _Chr_. [‘_atsit_’]

ætslāpan^7 _to sleep beside_, #Lcd# 83a.

ætslīdan^1 _to slip, glide, fall_, _Æ_.

ætsomne (Æ) = ætsamne

ætspornan^3 (u) _to strike against, stumble, go wrong_, CP:
_rebel_ (æt).

ætspornung f. _offence, stumbling-block, misfortune_, CM 230.

ætspringan^3 _to rush forth, spurt out_, _B_ 1121. [‘_atspring_’]

ætspringnes, -sprung(en)nes f. _defection_.

ætspurnan = ætspornan

ætspyrning = ætspornung

ætst = itst pres. 2 sg. of etan.

ætst- = oðst-

ætstæl m. _aid, assistance_ (GK); = ætsteall (BT), #Gu# 150.

ætstæppan^6 _to step up to_, B 745.

ætstandan^6 _to stand still, stand at, near, in or by_, _Æ_: _remain,
stand up_: _check, resist_, Æ: _cease_, _Lk_; Æ. [‘_atstand_’]

ætstandend m. _bystander, attendant_, Æ.

ætstandende _standing by_, GD 284^21.

ætsteall m. _assistance, meeting with hostile intent_ (GK): _station,
camp station_ (BT), #Wald# 1^21.

ætstent v. ætstandan.

ætstente v. ætstyntan.

ætstillan _to still_, #Lcd# 25b.

ætstrengan _to withhold wrongfully_, LL 206´.

ætstyntan _to blunt, dull, weaken_.

ætswerian^6 _to deny on oath_, LL.

ætswīgan _to keep silence about_ (be) GD 217^18.

ætswimman^3 _to escape by swimming, swim out_, #Chr# 918.

āettan (āyttan) _to eat up_.

ǣtter, ǣttor = ātor

ǣttr- = ætr-

ætðringan^3 _to take away from, deprive of_.

ætweaxan^1 _to increase_ (Swt.).

ætwegan^5 _to bear away, carry off_, B 1198.

ǣtwela _abundance of food, feast_, #Soul# 123.

ætwenian _to wean from_, LL 368´.

ætwesan anv. _to be at hand_.

ætwesende _at hand, imminent_, WW.

ætwindan^3 _to escape_, _Æ_. [‘_atwind_’]

ætwist I. † f. _presence_. II. = edwist

ætwītan^6 _to reproach (with)_, _censure, taunt_, _Met, Ps_; CP.
[‘_atwite_’]

ætwrencan _to seize by fraud_.

ætȳcan _to add to, increase_, BH. [īecan]

ætȳcnes f. _increase_, BH.

ǣtȳnan = ontȳnan

ǣtynge = ǣtinge

ætys = ætis pres. 3 sg. of ætwesan.

æt-ȳwan, -ȳwian = ætīewan

ætȳwednes f. _showing, appearance, manifestation, revelation_, GD.

ætȳwigendlic _demonstrative_, #ÆGr#.

ætȳwnes f. _showing, manifestation, revelation_: _apparition_, Æ:
_Epiphany_.

ætȳwung f. _manifestation, Epiphany_, CM 531.

ǣðan I. (±)_to make oath, swear_. [āð] II. = īðan

æðel = æðele

ǣðel == ēðel

æðelboren _of noble birth, distinguished_, Æ: _free-born_, Æ: _inborn,
natural_.

æðelborennes f. _nobility of birth or nature_, Æ: _inborn nature_, OEG
4518.

æðelcund _of noble birth_.

æðelcundnes f. _nobleness_, #Bo# 46^13.

æðelcyning m. _noble king (Christ)_, Æ.

æðelduguð f. _noble retinue_, #Cr# 1012.

æðele _noble, aristocratic, excellent, famous, glorious_, _Ex, Gen_; Æ,
AO, CP: _splendid, fine, costly, valuable_: _lusty, young_: _pleasant,
sweet-smelling_, _Gen_: (+)_natural, congenial, suitable_. [‘_athel_’]

æðel-ferðingwyrt, -fyrdingwyrt f. _stitch-wort (plant)_, #Lcd#.

+æðelian † _to make noble or renowned_, _Hy_. [‘_i-athele_’]

æðelic = æðellic

āðelic = ēaðelic

æðeling m. _man of royal blood, nobleman, chief, prince_, AO, #Chr#
(v. LL 2·274): †_king, Christ, God_, _Cr_: †_man, hero, saint_; in pl.
_men, people_, _Gen_. [‘_atheling_’]

æðelinghād n. _princely state_, #Lcd# 3·438^5.

æðellic _noble, excellent_. adv. -līce.

æðelnes f. _nobility, excellence_.

æðelo = æðelu

æðelstenc m. _sweet smell_, #Ph# 195.

æðeltungol † n. _noble star_.

æðelu fn. _nobility, family, descent, origin_, CP: _nature_: _noble
qualities, genius, talents, pre-eminence_, _Bo_: _produce, growth_.
[‘_athel_’]

ǣð- = ēð-

ǣðm (ē) m. _air, breath, breathing_, CP; _Sat_. (ē): _vapour_, _B_:
_blast_, Æ. [‘_ethem_’]

ǣðmian _to fume, exhale, emit a smell_.

ǣðre = ǣdre

ǣðreclic _terrible_, #RPs# 95^4.

ǣðret- = āðryt-

ǣðrot n. _disgust, weariness_. [āðrēotan]

ǣðryt I. _troublesome, wearisome, disgusting_. II. n. _weariness,
disgust, tediousness_, Æ.

ǣðryte = ǣðryt I.

ǣðrytnes f. _tedium_, v. OEG 4582.

ǣðryttan _to weary_, Æ.

æðða (Bd, Death-song) = oððe

ǣw I. = ǣ. II. = ǣwe

ǣwǣde _without clothes_, WW 230^38.

ǣwan _to despise, scorn_, #Ps#.

ǣwbrǣce _despising the law_, Æ: _adulterous_, LL.

ǣwbreca (i, y) m. _adulterer_, _LL_ (y). [‘_eaubruche_^2’]

ǣwbryce m. _adultery_, Æ; _LL_. [‘_eaubruche_^1’]

ǣwda, æwdamann m. _witness, compurgator_, LL.

ǣwe I. fn. _married woman_, Æ: _married people_. II. _lawful_:
_married_: _born of the same marriage_.

ǣwelm = ǣwielm

ǣwenbrōðor m. _brother by the same marriage_, WW 413^29.

ǣwēne _doubtful, uncertain_.

ǣwerd adj.? _religious_, or sb.? _regular priest_, ANS 128·298. [cp.
ǣweweard]

æwerdla = æfwyrdla

ǣweweard m. _priest_, #Bl# 161^27.

ǣwfæst _upright, pious, devout, religious_, Æ, CP: _married_, Æ.

ǣwfæsten n. _legal or public fast_.

ǣwfæstlic _lawful_: _religious_, CP (ǣf-). adv. -līce.

ǣwfæstnes f. _religion, piety_.

ǣwicnes f. _eternity_, #RPs# 102^17 (v. p. 303).

ǣwielm (e, i, y), -wielme m. _source, fount, spring, beginning_, AO, CP.
[= ēawylm]

ǣwintre = ānwintre

ǣwis- = ǣwisc-

ǣwisc I. nf. _offence, shame, disgrace, dishonour_, AO. [_Goth._
aiwisks] II. _disgraced, shameless, indecent_.

ǣwiscberende _disgraceful, shameful_, WW 264^42.

ǣwisce = ǣwisc I.

ǣwisc-ferinend (#Gl#), -firina (NG) m. _shameless sinner, publican_.

ǣwisclic _disgraceful, infamous_, OEG.

ǣwiscmōd _ashamed, abashed, cowed_.

ǣwiscnes f. _shameless conduct_: _reverence_.

ǣwita m. _counsellor_, #El# 455.

ǣwlic _legal, lawful_. adv. -līce.

±ǣwnian _to marry_, Æ.

ǣwnung f. _wedlock_, OEG.

ǣwul _basket with a narrow neck for catching fish_, WW 181^11.
[?= cawl, BT]

ǣwumboren _lawfully born_, LL 76´.

ǣwung = ǣwnung

ǣwunge = ēawunge  [[under “ēawunga”]]

ǣwyll m. _stream_, BC 1·542.

ǣ-wylm, -wylme = ǣwielm

æwyrdla = æfwyrdla

ǣwyrp m. _throwing away_: _what is cast away_: _an abortion_. [āweorpan]

ǣwysc- = æwisc-

æx == æcs, eax

æxe = asce

æxeȳr f. _axe-head_, #Chr# 1012#e#. [ȳr]

æxfaru f. _‘apparatus,’ naval expedition_? (= æsc-? v. ES 37·184), #Gl#.

æxian = ascian  [[headword spelled “āscian”]]

æxl = eaxl

æxs = æcs

āfǣdan = āfēdan

āfǣgan _to depict, figure_, BH. [fāg]

āfǣgrian (æ) _to ornament, adorn_, BH.

ā-fælan, -fællan = āfyllan II.

āfǣman _to foam out_, #PPs# 118^131.

āfǣran _to frighten_, _PPs, Mk, Chr_; AO, CP. [‘_afear_,’ ‘_afeared_’]

āfæst = ǣwfæst

āfæstan I. _to fast_, LL, W. II. _to let out on hire_, MkR 12^1.

āfæstla interj. _certainly! assuredly!_ Æ.

āfæstnian (e) _to fix upon, fasten, make firm, confirm_, AO: _enter,
inscribe_, Æ: _build_.

āfǣttian _to fatten, anoint_, #APs# 22^6; #LPs# 140^5.

āfandelic = āfandodlic  [[under “āfandigendlic”]]

āfandian _to try, test, prove, tempt_, _Lk, Lcd_; Æ, CP: _find out,
experience_, Æ. āfandod (and āfanden?) _approved, excellent_, Æ.

āfand-igendlic, -odlic _proved, approved, laudable_. adv. -odlīce.

āfandung f. _trial_, Æ.

āfangennes f. _reception, acceptance_.

afara = eafora

āfaran _to go out, depart, march, travel_, Æ, AO; _Da_ 6. [‘_afare_’]

āfeallan^7 _to fall down, fall in battle_, _Lk_; CP: _fall off, decay_.
[‘_afalle_’]

āfeallan = āfyllan

āfēdan _to feed, nourish, bring up, maintain, support_, _Æ_; AO: _bring
forth, produce_. [‘_afede_’]

āfēgan _to join_, DR (oe).

āfehtan (DR) = āfeohtan

āfellan = āfyllan

āfelle = ǣfelle

āfeohtan^3 _to fight, fight against, attack_, AO: _tear out, destroy_.

āfēon ‘_odisse_,’ #PPs#.

āfeormian _to cleanse, purge, purify_.

āfeormung f. _scouring, cleansing, purging_, #Sc#.

ā-feorran, -feorrian (CP) = āfierran

āfeorsian _to remove, do away, expel, dispel_, Æ: _go away_.

āfer = āfor

afera = eafora

āfēran = āfǣran

aferian _to provide horses for team work (as service for a lord)_,
v. ANS 109·73f.

ā-ferian (#Gl#), -ferran = āfierran

āferscan _to become fresh_, #Bo# 86^20.

āfersian = āfeorsian

āfestnian (WW 49^8) = āfæstnian

afetigan = hafetian

āfierran (eo, i, y) _to remove, withdraw, depart_: _estrange from, take
away, expel, drive away_, CP. [feorr]

āfierrednes (y) f. _removal_, NC 270.

āfīgen _fried_, #Gl#.

āfilgan _to pursue_, #Gen# 14^15.

āfindan^3 (= on-) _to find, find out, discover, detect_, _Jn_; Æ:
_experience, feel_, Æ. [‘_afind_’]

āfir- = āfierr-, āfeor-, āfyr-

āfirðan (= y) _to remove_, #Lcd# 1·294n.

āflægen pp. of āflēan.

āflǣman = āflīeman

āflēan^6 _to strip off, flay_, GD.

āflēgan (DR) = āflīegan

āflēman = āflīeman

āflēon^2, -flēogan _to fly, flee away_, _Gu_: _fly from, escape_.
[‘_aflee_’]

āflēotan^2 _to skim_, #Lcd#.

āflīan = āflīegan

āflīegan (ī, ȳ) _to put to flight, expel_, _Æ_ (ī). [‘_afley_’]

āflīeman (ȳ) _to put to flight, expel, scatter, disperse, rout_, _Chr_;
CP: _banish_. [‘_afleme_’]

āflīgan = āflīegan

āflīgung f. _attack_? #Lcd# 1·338^12.

-āflīung v. mete-ā.

āflōwan^7 _to flow, flow away or from, pass away_, AO, CP.

āflȳg-, āflȳh- = āflīeg-

āflygennes f. _attack_ (BT), #Lcd# 1·366^7.

āflȳman = āflīeman

āfōgian = āwōgian

afol n. _power, might_, LL (304^22).

āfōn (= on-) _to receive, take in, take_, _Mk, Ps_: _lay hold of,
seize_, _MtR, Jul_: _hold up support_. [‘_afong_’]

āfondian = āfandian

āfor _bitter, acid, sour, sharp_: _dire, fierce severe, harsh,
impetuous_. [_OHG._ eivar, eibar]

afora = eafora

āforhtian _to be frightened, take fright, wonder at_, Æ.

ā-frēfran, -frēfrian _to comfort, console, make glad_, CP. [frōfor]

āfrem-dan, -dian _to alienate_, Æ: _become alienated_.

āfremðan (#VPs#) = āfremdan

āfremðung f. _alienation_, VHy.

āfrēoðan^2 _to froth_, #Lcd# 45b.

āfrēon (-ia, N) _to deliver, free_.

afslōg = ofslōg  [[form of “ofslēan”]]

after = æfter

āfūlian _to become foul, putrefy, rot, be corrupt, defiled_.

afulic _perverse_. v. ES 42·162.

āfulliend m. _fuller_, MkR 9^3.

āfunde rare wk. pret. 3 sg. of āfindan.

āfundennes f. _invention, device, discovery_, Æ.

āfȳlan _to foul, stain, defile, corrupt_, _CP_; Æ. [‘_afile_’]

āfyllan I. (w. g. or d.) _to fill, fill up, replenish, satisfy_, _Æ_;
AO: _complete, fulfil_. [‘_afill_’]. II. (y = ie) _to cause to fall,
fell, beat down, overturn, subvert, demolish, abolish_, _Lk_; Æ: _slay,
kill_. [‘_afelle_’]

āfyndan = āfindan

āfyr- = āfierr-

āfȳran _to emasculate_. āfȳred (CP), āfȳrd pp. as sb. _eunuch_.

āfyrhtan _to frighten, terrify_, Æ, AO.

āfȳrida = āfȳred

āfyrran = āfierran

āfyrsian = āfeorsian

āfȳsan (intr.) _to hasten_: _inspire with longing_, #Bl#: (tr.) _urge,
impel, excite_: _drive away_. [fūs]

āga m. _proprietor, owner_, GD 230^11.

āgǣlan _to hinder, keep back, preoccupy, detain, hold back, retard,
delay_, AO: _neglect_, CP: _profane_.

āgǣlwan _to terrify, astonish_, AO.

āgalan^6 _to sound forth, sing, chant_.

āgald = āgeald pret. 3 sg. of āgieldan.

āgālian _to become slack_, CP 65^18.

āgan I. (conj. Wt 546) _to own, possess, have, obtain_, _An, Bo, Ma,
Mt_; AO, CP: _give, give up, deliver, restore_: _have to pay, ‘owe,’_
_Mt, Lk_: _have to do_, ANS 123·417. ā. ūt _find out, discover_. II.
pret. 3 sg. of āginnan (onginnan).

āgān (conj. v. gān) _to go, go by, pass_ (of time), _Mk_. of ā. _go
away_: _occur, befal_, Æ: _come forth, grow_, _Ps_: _approach_: _lose
strength_. [‘_ago_’]

āgangan = āgān

āge f. _possessions, property_. [_ON._ eiga]

agēan == ongēan

āgehwǣr = ǣhwǣr

āgeldan I. †_to punish_. II. = āgieldan

āgēlwan = āgǣlwan

āgēman = āgȳman

āgen I. _‘own,’ proper, peculiar_, _BH, Sat, Mt_; AO, CP, #Chr#, Æ.
ā. cyre _freewill_. āgnes ðonces _voluntarily, spontaneously_: _proper
(gram.)_, #ÆGr#. II. n. _property_, _LL_: _own country_. III. pp. of
āgan.

āgēn == ongēan

agēnbewendan _to return_.

āgēncuman^4 _to return_, Lk 8^40.

āgend m. _owner, possessor, master, lord_. se ā. _the Lord_.

āgendfrēa I. m. _lord, owner_. II. f. _mistress_? #Gen# 2237.

āgendfrēo = āgendfrēa

āgendlīce _properly, as one’s own_: _imperiously_, CP 145^5.

āgen-friga, -frige = āgendfrēa

āgēngehweorfan^3 _to return_.

āgēnhwyrfan _to return_.

āgēniernan^3 _to run against, meet_.

āgēnlǣdan _to lead back_, WW 91^9.

āgenlic _own_: _owed, due_, DR.

āgennama m. _proper name_, #ÆGr# 25^16.

āgennes f. _property_, Æ.

āgēnsendan _to send back_, Lk.

āgenslaga m. _slayer of oneself, suicide_, Æ.

āgēnstandan^6 _to press, urge_, Lk.

āgenung = āgnung

āgēode = āēode pret. 3 sg. of āgān.

āgeolwian _to become yellow_.

āgēomrian _to mourn, grieve_, GD.

āgeornan = āgyrnan

āgēotan^2 _to pour out, pour forth, shed_, _MtL_; CP: _melt, found_
(of images): _destroy_: _deprive (of)_, #Jud# 32. [‘_ageten_’]

āgētan = āgītan

āgiefan^5 (eo, i, y) _to give, impart, deliver, give up, yield,
relinquish_, _Mt_ (y): _restore, return, repay, pay_, AO. eft ā. _give
back, return_. [‘_agive_’]

āgieldan^3 (e, i, y) _to pay, repay, compensate, yield, restore,
reward_, AO: _offer oneself, offer up (as a sacrifice)_: _perform
(an office)_, Æ (y): _allow_: _to punish_? #Ph# 408.

āgīemelēasian (i, y) _to neglect, despise_, CP. āgīmelēasod _neglectful,
careless_, NC 337.

āgīeta = āgīta

āgifan (AO, CP) = āgiefan

āgifian _to bestow, grant_, DR 124^19.

āgift = ǣgift

āgildan (CP) = āgieldan

āgilde = ǣgilde

āgilpan^3 _to exult in_ (w. d.), #Soul# 165.

āgiltan = āgyltan

āgīmelēasian (C) = āgīemelēasian

āgimmed _set with precious stones_, Æ.

āginnan = onginnan

āgīta m. _prodigal, spendthrift_, CP.

āgitan = ongietan

āgītan I. _to waste, destroy_, _Chr_. [‘_aget_’] II. = āgēotan

āglāchād m. _state of misery_, #Rd# 54^5.

āg-lǣc, -lāc † n. _trouble, distress, oppression, misery, grief_.

āglǣca † (ē) m. _wretch, monster, demon, fierce enemy_.

āglǣccræft (āc-) m. _evil art_, #An# 1364.

āglǣcwīf n. _female monster_, B 1259.

āglǣdan? _to cause to slip_. v. AB 19·163.

āglēca = āglǣca

āglīdan^1 _to glide, slip, stumble_.

agn- = angn-

āgnere m. _owner_, #ÆGr# 110^19.

āgnes = āgenes gmn. of āgen adj.

āgnett n. _interest, usury_, LkL 19^23.

āgnettan _to appropriate_, #Gl#.

āgnettung f. ‘_usurpatura_’? Lk 19^23 (ES 42·163).

±āgnian _to ‘own,’_ _Rd_: _claim_: _appropriate, usurp_, _Bo, Mt_; CP:
_make over (to)_, Æ.

āgnīdan^1 _to rub off_, WW 386^16.

āgniden I. f. _rubbing_, #Gl#? (v. A 31·533). II. _used, threadbare_, WW
220^24.

āgniend (āh) m. _owner, possessor_.

±āgniendlic _possessive, genitive (case)_, #ÆGr#.

+āgnod _own_, CP 262^23.

āgnung f. _owning, ownership, possession_: _claim, declaration or proof
of ownership_.

āgotenes f. _effusion, shedding_.

āgrafan^6 _to curve, hew, sculpture_, Æ: _engrave, inscribe_, Æ.

āgrafenlic _sculptured_, #ARSPs# 105^19.

āgrāpian _to grasp tightly_, ÆL 8^121.

āgrētan (oe) _to attack_, LkLR 9^42.

āgrimetian (y) _to rage_, GD.

āgrīsan^1 _to quake, fear_, _LL_. [‘_agrise_’]

āgrōwen _overgrown_.

āgryndan _to descend_, #Men# 111.

āgrȳsan = āgrīsan

agu f. _magpie_, WW 132^11.

Agustus m. _August_.

āgyf- = āgief-

āgyld- = āgield-, ǣgild-

āgylpan = āgilpan

āgyltan _to offend, sin, do wrong_, _Æ_; CP. [‘_aguilt_’]

āgyltend m. _debtor_.

āgylting f. _guilt, offence_, DR.

āgyltnes f. _guilt_, NC 270.

āgȳman (ē) _to regard, contemplate_, AS: _heal, cure_.

āgȳmelēasian = āgīemelēasian

āgymmed = āgimmed

agynnan = onginnan

āgyrnan _to desire, be eager for_, GD 205^19 (eo).

āgytan = ongietan

ah (AO, CP) = ac (conj. and adv.)

āh pres. 3 sg. of āgan.

āh- = āg-

āhabban _to restrain_: (refl.) _abstain_ (fram): _support_.

āhaccian _to pick out_, ÆL 23^78.

āhæbban = āhebban

āhældan = āhildan

āhafennes f. _rising, lifting up_: _elevation, pride_.

āhalsian _to implore_.

āhangian _to hang_, LkL 23^39.

āhātan _to name_, MtL 27^16.

āhātian _to become hot_, WW 214^31.

āhealdan^7 (= on-) _to hold, keep_, DR, JnL.

āhealtian _to limp, crawl_, #LPs# 17^46.

āheardian _to be or become hard, grow hard or inured_, CP: _endure_.

āheardung f. _hardening_, #Lcd#.

āhēawan^7 _to cut off, out or down_, Æ, CP: _cut wood into planks_.

āhebban^6 (occl. wk. pret. āhefde and pp. āhefed) (often w. ūp) _to lift
up, stir up, raise, exalt, erect_, _Lk_; CP: _take away, remove_:
_support, uphold_: _leaven_. [‘_aheave_’]

āhebbian = āebbian

āhefednes = āhafennes

āhefegian (CP), -hef(i)gian (æ) _to make heavy, oppress_.

āheld (#VPs#) = āhyld pp. of āhyldan.

āhellian? _to cover over, conceal, hide_, OEG 5410.

āhelpan^3 _to help, support_ (w. g.).

āhēnan _to humble_, LkL: _accuse_, NG. [hīenan; hēan]

āheolorian _to weigh, consider_, #Gl#.

āhēran = āhȳran

āherian _to praise_, DR.

āhērian = āhȳrian

āherstan (#BPs#) = āhyrstan

āheten pp. of āhatan.  [[error for “āhātan”?]]

āhicgan = āhycgan

āhīenan v. āhēnan.

āhierdan (i, y) _to make hard, harden_, CP: _encourage, animate_.
[heard]

āhīeðan = āhȳðan

āhildan (æ, e, y) _to bend, incline_, Æ: _rest, lay down_ (tr. and
intr.): _turn away, avert_: _cast down, destroy_.

āhirdan (CP) = āhierdan

āhīðan = āhȳðan

āhladan^6 _to draw out, lead out, draw forth_, Æ: _exclude_, #Bk# 18.

āhlǣca = āglǣca

āhlǣnan _to set oneself up_, #Mod# 53.

āhlǣnsian _to become lean_, Æ.

āhlēapan^7 _to leap, spring up_, AO.

āhlēfan (oe) _to pull out_, DR 55^10.

āhlēoðrian _to sound, resound_, GD.

āhlīehhan^6 _to laugh at, deride_: _laugh out, exult_.

āhlin-ian, -nan = ālinnan

āhlocian _to dig out_, #Gl#, MtR 5^29. [?= *ālocian, cp. lucan (BT) and
v. ES 42·165]

āhlōwan _to roar again_, WW 492^11.

āhlūttrian _to cleanse, purify_.

āhlyhhan = āhliehhan  [[headword spelled “āhlīehhan”]]

āhlȳttrian = āhlūttrian

āhn- = āgn-

āhnēopan^2 _to pluck off_, #Gu# 819.

āhnescian _to become soft or effeminate_, AO: _weaken_. [hnesce]

āhnīgan^1 _to fall down_: _bow down_.

āhogian _to think out, be anxious about_, GD.

āholan = āholian

āholian _to hollow, scoop out_, CP. ūt ā. _to root out, pluck out_:
_engrave, emboss_.

āhōn^7 _to hang, suspend, crucify_, _MkLR_; AO, CP. [‘_ahang_’]

āhopian _to hope for_ (tō), #Bl# 17^23.

āhrǣcan _to spit out_, #Lcd# 9a.

āhræscian _to shake off_? (BT), #LPs# 108^13.

āhreddan _to set free, save, rescue, re-capture_, _AO_; Æ. [‘_aredde_’]

āhredding f. _salvation, deliverance_, HL 9^281, EC 230.

āhrēofian _to become leprous_, MH 174^12.

āhrēosan^2 _to rush_: _fall, fall down_, Æ: _be destroyed_.

āhrepian _to treat_, FBO 80^5.

āhrēran (= on-) _to move, shake, make to tremble_, CP.

āhrīnan^1 (= on-) _to touch, handle_, _Lk_. [‘_arine_’]

āhrisian (y) _to shake, stir up_, _CP_: _shake off_. [‘_arese_’]

āhrȳnan = āhrīnan

āhrȳran _to cause to fall, destroy_, #Gl#.

āhrysian = āhrisian

ahse = asce

āhsian = āscian

aht = eaht

āht = āwiht

ahta = eahta

āhte, āhton pret. 3 sg. and pl. of āgan.

āhtes (= g. of āht) _of any account or value_.

āhtlīce _stoutly, manfully_, #Chr# (E).

āhwā pron. _any one_.

āhwǣnan _to vex, grieve, afflict_, _Lcd_; Æ. [‘_awhene_’]

āhwænne adv. _when, whenever_: _at sometime, any time_, RB: _at all
times_.

āhwǣr (ā, ē) _anywhere_, _Bo, LL, Æ_: _at any time, ever, in any way_.
[‘_owhere_’]

āhwǣrgen _anywhere_: _in any case_.

āhwæt n. _anything_.

āhwæðer (āwðer, āðer, āðor) I. pron. _some one, something_; _any one_:
_anything_. II. adv. and conj. _either_, _AO, CP_. āðer...oððe =
_either...or_, _AO, LL_. [‘_outher_’]

āhwanon = āhwonan

āhwār = āhwǣr

āhwelfan = āhwylfan

āhweorfan^3 (tr.) _to turn, turn away, convert_: (intr.) _turn aside,
turn away_, _Gen_: _avert_. [‘_ahwerf_’]

āhwēr == āhwǣr

āhwerfan = āhwierfan

āhwettan _to whet, excite, kindle_, AO: _hold out to, provide_:
_reject_.

āhwider _in any direction, from any source_, Æ.

āhwierfan _to turn away, turn from, avert_, CP.

āhwilc = ǣghwilc

āhwistlian v. āwistlian.

āhwītian _to whiten_, #BJPs# 50^9.

āhwonan _from any source, anywhere_.

āhwonne = āhwænne

āhwyder = āhwider

āhwylfan _to cover over, submerge, subvert_, Æ: _to roll to_, MP 1·592.
up ā. _pull up, loosen_.

āhwyrfan = āhwierfan

āhycgan † _to think out, devise_.

āhȳdan _to hide, conceal_.

āhyldan = āhildan

āhyldendlic _enclitic_, #ÆGr# 265^1. [āhildan]

āhyltan _to trip up_, #PPs# 139^5.

āhȳran (ē) _to hire_.

āhyrdan = āhierdan

āhyrdung f. _hardening_, #Sc# 232^19.

āhȳrian = āhȳran

āhyrstan (= ie) _to roast, fry_, #Lcd# 33b; #BPs# 101^4 (e).

āhyspan _to reproach_, #LPs# 101^9.

āhȳðan (īe, ī) _to plunder, destroy, devour_. [hūð]

āīdan (ȳ)? ‘_eliminare_,’ v. OEG 7^109n; BT.

ā-īdlian, -īdlan, -īdelian _to be or make useless, frustrate, empty,
annul_, Æ, CP: _profane_: _be free from_: _deprive (of)_. [īdel]

āiernan^3 _to run away, run out, go over_: _pass by, go_.

āīeðan (ǣ, ī, ȳ) _to lay low, demolish, destroy, cast out_.

al = eall, æl

āl n. _fire, burning_, OEG 4389; 4470. [cp. ǣlan]

ālādian _to excuse_, #Bo# 144^5. ālādiendra ‘_excussorum_,’ #BPs# 126^4.

ālæccan _to catch, take_, #Chr# 1123.

ālǣdan (tr.) _to lead, lead away, carry off, withdraw, conduct, bring_,
Æ: (intr.) _be produced, grow, come forth_.

ālænan _to lend_, _Æ_: _grant, lease_. [‘_alene_’]

ālær = alor

ālǣran _to teach_, #PPs# 118^108.

ālǣson pret. pl. of ālesan.

ālǣtan^7 _to let go, give up, leave, lose, resign, lay aside_, _Jn_; AO,
CP: _let, allow_: _release, pardon, forgive_: _deliver_, Æ. [‘_alet_’]

ālǣtnes f. _loss_: _remission (of sins)_.

alan^6 _to nourish, produce_. [_Goth._ alan]

ālangian (impers.) _to affect with longing_, _Soul_ 154. [‘_along_’]

ālatian _to grow sluggish or dull_, #Gl#.

alað I. = ealað (v. ealu). II. pres. 3 sg. of alan.

ālāðian^1 (#Gl#) _to be hateful_: _hate_: _threaten_.

alb f. _while garment, ‘alb,’_ _LL_. [_L._]

ald (EWS, EK, A) == eald

āld = ādl

ālecgan _to put, place, lay down, lay aside, give up, cease from,
abandon_, _LL_; Æ, AO, CP. ālecgende word, ālecgendlic word _deponent
verb_: _put down, allay, suppress, abolish, conquer, destroy, overcome,
refute_, _Æ, LL_: _lay upon, inflict_: _diminish, lessen, withhold_, Æ.
[‘_allay_’]

ālēd I. pp. of ālecgan. II. = ālǣd pp. of ālǣdan.

ālēfan = ālīefan

ālēfednes f. _infirmity_, ÆL 21^99.

ālēfian _to injure, maim_; _enfeeble_, Æ. pp. _ill_, Æ. [lēf]

ālenian (K) = ālynnan

ālēodan^2 † _to spring up, grow_.

āleofian = ālifian

ālēogan^2 _to lie, deny, deceive, be false to, leave unfulfilled_,
Æ, AO.

ālēon^1 (= on-) _to lend, give up_, DR.

āleonian = ālynnan

ālēoran _to depart, flee away_, #VPs# 51^7.

āleoðian = āliðian

aler == alor

ālēs- = ālīes-

ālesan^5 _to pick out, choose_.

ālet (#Da# 254) = ǣled

ālētan = ālǣtan

ālēðran = ālȳðran

alewe, al(u)we f. ‘_aloe_,’ _Jn, Lcd_.

ālēwed ptc. _feeble, weak, ill_. [lēf]

alexandre f. _horse-parsley_, _Lcd_. [‘_alexanders_’]

alfæle (#An# 770) = ealfelo

ālfæt n. _cooking vessel, cauldron_. [ǣlan]

ālgeweorc n. _fire-making, tinder_, #Gl#.

algian = ealgian

alh == ealh

ālibban _to live, pass one’s life_, AO.

ālibbende _everlasting_.

ālicgan^5 _to be subdued, fail, cease, yield, perish_, AO.

ālīefan (ē, ī, ȳ) _to allow, give leave to, grant_, AO, CP: _hand over,
yield up_.

ālīefedlic _lawful, permissible_. adv. -līce (CP, Æ).

ālīefednes (ȳ) f. _permission_.

ālīesan (ē, ī, ȳ) _to loosen, let loose, free, redeem, release,
absolve_, _Mt_ (ȳ), AO, CP. [‘_alese_’]

ālīes-ednes, -(e)nes (ē, ȳ) f. _redemption, ransom_, _MtWLR: _remission
(of sins)_, ERHy 9^77.

ālīesend (ē, ī, ȳ) m. _liberator, deliverer, Redeemer_, CP.

ālīesendlic (ȳ) _loosing, liberating_, BH.

ālīesing, -līesnes (ȳ) = ālīesednes

ālīf n. _eternal life_, MFH 108^160.

ālīfan = ālīefan

ālifian = ālibban

ālīh (DR) imperat. sg. of ālēon.

ālīhtan _to lighten, relieve, alleviate, take off, take away_:
‘_alight_,’ _ÆGr_: (= onlīhtan) _light up_, _Æ_.

ālimpan^3 † _to occur, happen_.

ālinnan = ālynnan

ālīsend = ālīesend

āliðian (eo) _to detach, separate_, _Gen_: _set free_. [‘_alithe_’]

all (strictly Anglian, but found in AO, CP) == eal, eall

almes- = ælmes-

aln- = ealn-

alo- = ealu-

āloccian _to entice_, AO.

alor, al(e)r m. ‘_alder_,’ _Gl, KC, Lcd_; Mdf.

alordrenc m. _drink made of alder sap_? #Lcd# 40a.

alorholt nm. _alder-wood_, WW.

alorrind m. _alder-bark_, #Lcd# 12b.

aloð = ealu

alr == alor

alswā = ealswā

alter, altar(e), altre m. ‘_altar_,’ _Æ_; CP. [_L._ altare]

ālūcan^2 _to pluck up, pull out, separate, take away_.

ālutan^2 (= onl-) _to bend, incline, bend or bow down_, Æ. āloten pp.
_submissive_.

aluwe, alwe = alewe

alwald- = eal(l)weald-

ālybban = ālibban

ālȳfan (Æ) = ālīefan

ālȳfed I. = ālīefed pp. of ālīefan. II. = ālēfed pp. of ālēfian.

ālȳfed- = ālīefed-

ālȳht- = onlīht-

ālyhtan = ālihtan  [[headword spelled “ālīhtan”]]

ālȳman _to come forth, shew forth_.

ālynnan, -lynnian (e, eo, i) _to deliver, let go, release, loosen_, Æ.

ālȳs- = ālīes-

ālȳðran (ē) _to lather_, #Lcd#. [lēaðor]

am (NG) = eom

ām m. _reed or slay of a loom_, #Rd# 36^8.

āmællian = āmeallian

āmǣnsumian = āmānsumian

āmǣran I. _to extol_, GD 206^24. II. (usu. ūtāmǣr(i)an) _to
exterminate_, BH.

āmæstan _to feed with mast, fatten, feed up_, CP.

āmagian (hamacgian) _to revive, be restored to health_, #Lcd# 3·184^21.

āman = onman  [[form of “onmunan”]]

āmang prep. w. d. _among, amongst_: _while, whilst, during_. ā. ðām,
ðissum _meanwhile_. [= gemang]  [[listed as “+mang”]]

āmanian _to exact, require_, LL.

āmānsian = āmānsumian

āmānsung = āmānsumung

āmānsumian _to excommunicate, anathematize, curse, proscribe, outlaw_,
_BH_; Æ, AO. [‘_amanse_’]

āmān-sumung, -sumnung f. _excommunication, curse_, _Æ_. [‘_amansing_’]

āmarod _disturbed, troubled, confounded_. [cp. āmyrred]
  [[form of “āmyrran”?]]

āmasian _to amaze, confound_.

āmāwan^7 _to cut down_, #PPs# 101^4.

āmb (A 9·265) = ām

ambeht == ambiht

amber (e^1, o^1, æ^2, o^2, u^2) mfn. _vessel, pail, pitcher, tankard_:
_cask, dry or liquid measure_ (? _four bushels_). [_L._ amphora]

ambiht (e^1, o^1, y^1, e^2) I. n. _office, service_: _commission,
command, message_. II. m. _attendant, messenger, officer_.

+ambihtan (embe-) _to minister, serve_, NG.

ambihtere (embe-) m. _servant_, #LkL# 22^26.

ambihthēra _obedient servant_, #Gu# 571 (o^1).

ambihthūs n. _workshop, ‘officina,’_ CM 1087.

ambihtmann m. _manservant_.

ambihtmecg † (o^1, e^2, y^2) m. _servant_.

ambihtnes, -sumnes (emb-) f. _service_, NG.

ambihtscealc † m. _functionary, retainer_.

ambihtsecg sm. _minister_, #Gen# 582.

ambihtsmið m. _court smith or carpenter_, LL 3[7].

ambihtðegn (omb-) † m. _attendant, servant_.

ambyht = ambiht

ambyre _favourable, fair_, AO. [and, byre]

ambyrian (OEG 11^142) = onbyrgan II.

āmeallian (æ) _to become insipid_, v. OEG 61^4.

āmeareian _to mark out, delineate, define, describe_: _destine, assign,
appoint_.

amel m. _sacred vessel_, WW 348. [_L._]

āmelcan^3 _to milk_, #Lcd#.

āmeldian _to let out, make known, betray_, Æ, AO.

ameos _‘ammeos,’ bishop-weed_, #Lcd# 71b. [_Gk._]

amerian = hamorian

āmerian _to test, examine_: _purify, refine_.

āmerran = āmierran

āmetan^5 _to measure, estimate_: _mete out, assign, grant, bestow_, Æ.

āmētan _to paint, depict_, CP: _adorn_, Æ.

āmetendlic _compendious, measurable, limited_. adv. -līce.

āmethwīl = ǣmethwīl

āmetsian _to provision_, #Chr# 1006#e#.

āmiddan = onmiddan

āmidian _to be foolish_, RHy 6^6.

āmīdlod _unbridled_, WW 226^38.

āmierran (e, i, y) _to hinder, obstruct, prevent, delay_, CP: _mar,
injure, disturb, scatter, consume, waste, spoil, destroy_, _Lk, Bo_; AO,
CP: _lose_. [‘_amar_’]

āmigdal m. _almond_, #Lcd#. [_Gk._]

āmōd = ǣmōd

āmolcen pp. of āmelcan.

āmolsnian _to decay, weaken_, W 147^29.

āmolten _molten_, ÆL 5^234.

amore f. _a kind of bird, yellow-hammer_? [cp. emer]

am-pella, -pulla m. _flask, vessel_. [_L._]

ampre I. _‘varix,’ tumour, swelling_, _Gl_. [‘_amper_’] II. f. _dock,
sorrel_, #Lcd#.

āmundian _to protect, defend_, Æ.

āmyltan (tr.) _to melt_, Æ.

āmyrdrian (LL 348, 56#a#) = āmyrðrian  [[under “āmyrðran”]]

āmyrgan _to delight, cheer_, #Sol# 240.

āmyrian = āmerian

āmyrran = (1) āmierran; (2) (LL 348, 56#g,b#) āmyrðran

ā-myrðran, -myrðrian _to murder, kill_, _LL_; #Chr# 1049#c#.
[‘_amurder_’]

an I. adv. and prep. = on. II. pres. 1 sg. of unnan.

an- in composition represents (1) and-; (2) un-; (3) in-; (4) on-.

ān I. adj. strong mfn. (asm. ānne, ǣnne) ‘_one_,’ _Mt, Æ_. in plur.
_each, every one, all_. ān and (æfter) ān _one by one_. ānes hwæt _some
single thing, a part_, B: _a, an_: _alone, sole, only_; in this sense it
is used also in the weak form (sē āna; hē āna, AO, CP) and with a pl.:
_singular, unique_: _single, each, every one, all_ (gp. ānra): _any_.
II. adv. (also wk. āna) _alone, only_. on ān _continually, continuously,
ever, in one, once for all, immediately_. ðæt ān _only that_.

ana = heonu

āna v. ān.

ānad, ānæd † n. _waste, desert, solitude_. [_Ger._ einöde]

ānæglian _to nail_, #Nar# 4^25.

anǣl- = onǣl-

anæðelian _to degrade_, #Bo, Met#.

+ānan _to unite_, BH 214^3.

ananbēam m. _spindle-tree_, #Lcd# 29b.

anawyrm m. _intestinal worm_, #Lcd# 43b.

anbærnes = onbærnes  [[under “onbærning”]]

anbestingan^3 _to thrust in, insert_, CP.

anbid (= on-) n. _waiting, expectation, hope_; AO, CP: _interval_, AO.

±an-bidian (on-) intr. _to wait, stay_: tr. w. g. _wait for, expect_.

anbidstōw (on-) f. _place of meeting_, LL.

anbidung m. _waiting for, expectation_: _delay_, OEG 3396.

anbiht = ambiht

anbindan = onbindan

anbiscopod = unbiscopod

ānboren † ptc. _only-begotten_.

anbringelle = onbringelle

anbrōce (#El# 1029) = unbrǣce?

anbrucol (= on-) _rugged_, GPH 402.

anbryrd- = onbryrd-

ānbūend m. _hermit, anchorite_, #Gu# 59.

anbūgan (AO, CP) = onbūgan

anbyhtscealc = ambihtscealc

ānbȳme _made of one trunk, dug-out (ship)_, WW 181^33.

±anbyrdan (and-) _to strive against, resist, oppose, attack_.

anbyrdnes f. _resistance_, LL 214[14].

anbyrignes (= on-) f. _tasting, taste_, WW.

ān-cenned (æ^2), -cend, _only-begotten_, Æ.

ancer == ancor

an-clēow n., -clēowe f. ‘_ankle_,’ _Lcd, Æ_.

ancnāwan = oncnāwan

ancor m. ‘_anchor_,’ _B, Bo_; CP. [_L._ ancora; from _Gk._]

ān-cor, -cora m. _anchorite, hermit_, Æ. [_L._ anachoreta; from _Gk._]

ancorbend (oncer-) m. _cable_, B 1918.

āncorlic _like a hermit_, WW 463^7.

āncorlīf n. _solitary life_, BH.

ancorman m. _man in charge of the anchor_, WW 166^7.

ancorrāp m. _anchor rope, cable_.

ancorsetl n. _prow of a ship_.

āncorsetl n. _hermitage_, Æ.

āncorsetla m. _hermit_, Æ.

āncorstōw f. _solitary place_, BH 424^12.

ancorstreng (ancer-) m. _cable_.

ancra = ancor

āncra (a^1?) m. _anchorite, hermit, monk_, _WW_; Æ. [‘_anchor_’]

ancsum == angsum

ancuman^4 _to arrive_, #Gen# 1884.

āncummum _one by one, singly_, NG.

āncyn adj. _only_, A 2·358; #LPs# 21^21.

and conj. _‘and,’ but_. gelīce and... _like as if..._ AO.

and- = an-, on-, ond- (_opposition, negation_. _Ger._ ent-): and
occasionally a-.

anda m. _grudge, enmity, envy, anger, vexation_, _Mt_; Æ: _zeal_, Æ, CP:
_injury, mischief_: _fear, horror_, NG. [‘_ande_,’ ‘_onde_’]

āndæge † _for one day, lasting a day_.

andæt- = andet-

āndaga m. _appointed day_, Æ.

±āndagian _to fix a day for appearance_: _adjourn_, EC 163.

andb- = anb-, onb-

andbēcnian _to make signs to_, WW.

andbita m. _feast (of unleavened bread)_.

andclēow = anclēow

andcweðan ‘_contradicere, frustrari_,’ #HGl# 491.

andcwiss f. _answer_, #Gu# 992.

andcȳðnes f. _evidence_, BH 158^5.

andd- = and-, ond-

ande == ende

andēages (æ) _eye to eye, in the face, openly_? B 1935.

andēaw _arrogant, ostentatious_, #Sc#.

andefn, -efen f. _measure, quantity, amount_, AO: _capacity,
nature_, CP.

andel-bær, -bǣre _reversed_, OEG.

andergilde _at little cost_? (BT).

andet- = andett-

andetla m. _declaration, confession_, LL 18[22].

±andetnes (ond- CP) f. _confession_, Æ: _thanksgiving, praise_.

andetta m. _one who confesses_. a. bēon _to acknowledge_.

±andettan _to confess, acknowledge_, Æ, CP: _give thanks or praise_:
_promise, vow_. [and, hātan]

andett-end, -ere m. _confessor_.

andettian = andettan

andettung m. _confession, profession_, CP.

andfang m. _acceptance_.

andfangol ‘_susceptor_,’ #LPs# 45^12.

āndfealdlīce = ānfealdlīce

andfeax _bald_, W 46^1.

andfeng (on-) m. _seizing, receiving, taking_, Æ, RB: _defence_:
_defender_: _attack, assault_: _revenue, means_, Lk 14^28, #Bk# 10:
_illegal occupation of (land)_.

andfenga m. _receiver, defender, undertaker_, #Ps#.

andfenge I. _acceptable, agreeable, approved, fit, suitable_, Æ, CP:
_that can receive_: _taken_. II. m. _undertaker_: _receptacle_.

andfengend m. _defender_, #Ps#: _receiver_. gafoles a. _tax collector_.

andfengestōw f. _receptacle_, WW 213^43.

andfengnes f. _acceptance, receiving_: _receptacle_: _acceptableness_, W
253^21.

andfex = andfeax

andgelōman = andlōman

andget == andgit  [[under “andgiet”]]

andgete † adj. _plain, manifest_. [andgiete]  [[under “andgiet”]]

andgiet (ond-; e, i, y) n., andgiete f. _understanding, intellect_,
_Mt_; Æ, CP: _knowledge, perception_, CP: _sense, meaning_, Æ, CP: _one
of the five senses_: _plan, purpose_. [‘_angit_’]

andgiet- = andgit-

andgitful _intelligent, sensible_.

andgitfullic _intelligible, clear_. adv. -līce.

andgitlēas _foolish, senseless_, Æ.

andgitlēast f. _want of understanding_, Æ.

andgitlic = andgitfullic

andgitol _intelligent, sensible_.

andgittācen ‡ (ie^2) n. _sensible token, sign_.

andgyt = andgiet

andgyt- = andgit-

  [[Printed on one line:
  andgyt == andgiet, -git]]

andhēafod n. _heading, unploughed headland of a field_, EC.

andhetan, andhettan = andettan

andhweorfan^3 _to move against, blow against_, B 548. [or ? onhweorfan]

andian _to be envious or jealous_.

andig _envious, jealous_, OEG.

andlāman = andlōman

andlang (o^1, o^2) I. adj. _entire, continuous, extended_. andlangne
dæg, niht _all day (night) long_, _An, Gu_. [_‘along_’] II. prep. w. g.
‘_along,’ by the side of_, _Æ, Chr, KC_; AO.

andlangcempa (anl-) _soldier fighting in line_, WW 450^18.

andlata (#Cr# 1436) = andwlita

andlēan † n. _retribution, retaliation_.

and-leofen (ie, i, y) f., -leofa m. _sustenance, nourishment, food_:
_money, wages_. [libban]

andlīcnes = onlīcnes

andliefen (AO, CP), andlifen = andleofen

andlōman (ā^2, u^2) m. pl. _utensils, implements, vessels_.

andlong = andlang

andlyfen = andleofen

andmitta = anmitta

andrecefæt? n. _wine or oil press_, WW 123^37.

andriesne = ondrysne

an-drysen-, -drysn- = ondrys(e)n-

and-rysno f. _respect, reverence_: _etiquette_.

andsaca m. _adversary_: _denier, apostate_.

andsacian _to dispute, deny_, CP.

andsæc m. _denial, oath of purgation_, _El, LL_: _refusal_: _strife,
resistance_. [‘_andsech_’]

andsǣte adj. _hateful, odious, repugnant_, _Æ_: _hostile_. [‘_andsete_’]

andslyht † m. _blow_.

andspeornan^3 _to stumble against_, NG.

andspyrnes f. _offence_, MtR 16^23.

āndstreces = ānstreces

and-sumnes, -sundnes (= on-) f. _purity, chastity, virginity_. v. OEG
1696.

±andswarian _to ‘answer,’_ _Lk_; Æ, CP.

andswaru f. _‘answer,’ reply_, _B, Jn_; CP.

and-swerian (#VPs#), -sworian = andswarian

andsȳn = ansīen

and-timber, -tymber = ontimber

andðracian = onðracian

andðræce = onðræce

andung f. _jealousy_, #LPs# 77^58.

andūstrian ‘_detestari_,’ MtR 26^74.

andūstrung f. ‘_abominatio_,’ MtR 24^15.

andwǣscan = ādwǣscan

andwǣt _moist_.

andward- = andweard-

andweal- = onweal-

andweard (+ at AS 63^14) _present, actual, existing_, Æ, CP:
_opposite to_.

±andweardian _to present, bring before one_. (+andweardian also =
andwyrdian.)

andweardlic _present, actual_. adv. -līce.

andweardnes f. _presence_, CP: _present time_.

andwendednes = onwendednes

andweorc n. _matter, substance, material_, CP: _cause_.

andwerd == and-weard, -wyrd

andwīg m. _resistance_, #Gu# 147.

andwille = ānwille

andwirdan = andwyrdan

andwīs _expert, skilful_, #Jul# 244.

andwīsnes f. _experience_, WW 20^5.

andwist f. _support_? _station_? #An# 1542.

andwlata = andwlita

+andwlatod ‘_frontosus_,’ OEG 8^365.

andwlita (a, eo) m. _face, forehead, countenance, form_, _B, MtR_; AO,
CP. [‘_anleth_’]

andwlite n. = andwlita

andwliteful ‘_vultuosus_,’ GPH 393.

andwrāð _hostile, enraged_, #Pa# 17.

and-wurd, -wyrd == andweard  [[under “andwurd”]]

±and-wyrdan, -wyrdian (e, i) _to answer_, _Æ, Mt_; AO, CP: (+an-)
‘_conspirare_,’ WW 209^42. [‘_andwurde_’]

andwyrde n. _answer_, AO.

andwyrding f. ‘_conspiratio_,’ WW 373^11.

andȳde pret. of andōn (ondōn).

andytt- = andett-

āne (1) = ǣne, (2) heonu.

ān-ēage, -ē(a)gede (_ÆL_) _‘one-eyed,’ blind of one eye_.

ānecge adj. _having one edge_, Æ.

+āned v. ānian.

ānēge, ānēgede = ānēage

ānēhst = ānīhst  [[headword spelled “anihst”]]

ānemnan _to announce, declare_, _Gu_. [‘_aname_’]

ānerian _to deliver, rescue_, #LPs# 24^15; #EPs# 49^22.

ānes = ǣnes

ānescian = āhnescian

ānett mn., ānetnes f. _solitude, seclusion_, CP.

anf- = onf-

ān-feald, -fald, -fealdlic _single, unmixed, singular, unique,
superior_, _Æ_; CP: _simple, modest, honest, sincere_, _Mt_; CP: _fixed,
invariable_. ā. gerecednes _or_ sprǣc _prose_. [‘_afald_’] adv. -līce.

ānfealdnes f. _unity, concord_, AO: _simplicity_, CP.

anfealt f. _anvil_, OEG 11^67 and n. [cp. anfilte]  [[under “anfilt”]]

anfeng == andfeng

ānfēte _one-footed_, #Rd# 59^1.

an-filt (_Æ_), -filte (_Gl_), n. ‘_anvil_.’

anfindan = onfindan

ānfloga m. _lonely flier_, #Seaf# 62.

anfōn (AO) == onfōn

anforht _fearful_, #Cross# 117.

ānforlǣtan^7 _to let go, lose, relinquish, abandon, surrender_, CP:
_omit, neglect_.

ānforlǣtnes f. _loss, desertion_, #Bl# 85^31: _intermission_.

anforngean _in front of_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

anga (o) m. _stimulus, sting, goad_, CP.

ānga (ǣ, ē) _sole, only_: _solitary_.

angbrēost n. _tightness of the chest, asthma_, #Lcd#.

ange = enge

angeald pret. 3 sg. of angildan.

angēan == ongēan

angel I. m. _‘angle,’ hook, fish-hook_, _Bo, MtL_ (ongul). II. m. =
engel

Angel n. _Anglen, a district in Schleswig, from which the Angles
came_, AO.

Angelcynn n. _the English people_: _England_, AO.

āngeld = āngilde

angelic _like, similar_, #Bo# 44^18.

angeltwicce fm. _a certain worm used as bait, earthworm_? _WW, Lcd_.
[‘_angletwitch_’]

Angelðeod f. _the English people_: _England_.

āngenga I. _solitary, isolated_, Æ. II. m. _solitary goer, isolated
one_, B.

angerǣd = ungerād

āngetrum n. _illustrious company_, #Ex# 334.

angeweald = onweald

±angian _to be in anguish_, #RPs# 60^3; 142^4.

angien = anginn

angil = angel I.

angildan = ongieldan

āngilde (e, y) I. n. _single payment or rate of compensation for
damage_, _LL_: _the fixed price at which cattle and other goods were
received as currency_, LL. [‘_angild_’] II. adj. _to be compensated
for_. III. adv. _simply, only_, LL.

āngildes = āngilde III.

anginn n. _beginning_, _Æ_; AO, CP: _intention, design, enterprise,
undertaking_, CP: _action, onset, attack_: _rising (of sun)_.
[‘_angin_’]

anginnan (AO) = onginnan

angitan = ongietan

angitful = andgitful

Angle mp. _the Angles or English_ (who came from Anglen; v. Angel,
Engle).

angmōd _sad, sorrowful_.

angmōdnes f. _sadness, sorrow_, W 188^6.

angnægl m. _corn, ‘agnail,’_ _Lcd_ 30b.

angnere (on-) m. _corner of the eye_, WW 423^34.

angnes f. _anxiety, uneasiness, trouble, pain, anguish, fear_.

angol- = angel-, ongol-

angrisla (y) m. _terror_, #Bl# 203^7.

angrislic (y^2) _grisly, terrible_. adv. -(en)līce.

ang-set, -seta m. _eruption, pustule, carbuncle_, WW.

angsum _narrow, hard, difficult_.

±angsumian _to vex, afflict_, Æ.

angsumlic _troublesome, anxious, painful_. adv. -līce Æ.

angsumnes f. _pain_, Æ: _sorrow, trouble_: _difficulty, perplexity_.

āngum = ǣnigum dat. of ǣnig.

āngyld, āngylde = āngilde

angyn = onginn

angytan = ongietan

anh- = onh-

ānhaga (o^2) † m. _solitary being, recluse_.

anhende (= on-) _on hand, requiring attention_, AO 88^24.

ānhende _one-handed, lame, weak_, Æ.

ānhīwe ‘_uniformis_,’ OEG 1046.

anhoga m. _care, anxiety_, #Gu# 970.

ānhoga = ānhaga

ānhorn, ānhorna m. _unicorn_, #Ps#.

ānhrǣdlīce = ānrǣdlīce

ānhundwintre _a hundred years old_.

ānhȳdig † _resolute, firm, constant, stubborn, brave_.

ānhyrne I. _one-horned, having one horn_. II. m. _unicorn_.

ānhyrn-ed, -e(n)de _having one horn_, #Ps#.

+ānian _to unite_, BH 214. [‘_one_’ vb.]

ānīdan (ē, ȳ) _to restrain, repel_: _force_. ūt a. _expel, drive out_.
[nīed]

ānig = ǣnig

ān-īge, -īgge = ānēage

anihst † _last, in the last place_.

āniman^4 (y) _to take_, GD: _take away or from, deprive of_, _Mt_ (y);
CP. [‘_anim_’]

āninga = ānunga

āniðrian _to cast down_, #Chr# 675#e#.

anl- = andl-, onl-

anlǣc = anlēc

±ānlǣcan _to unite_, Æ.

ānlaga _acting alone_, WW 491^23.

anlang- = andlang-

ānlāp- (NG) = ānlīp-

anlēc m. _respect, regard_.

ānlegere _consorting with one man_, WW 171^15.

ān-lēp- = ānlīp-

ānlic _only, unique_: _solitary_: _catholic_: _beautiful_. [cp. ǣnlic]

ānlīepig = ānlīpig  [[under “ānlīpe”]]

ān-līpe (CP), -līpig (#Chr#), -līpie (æn-; ē, ȳ) I. adj. _single,
separate, solitary, private, individual, special_, _PPs_ 13^2, _BH,
MtR_. [‘_anlepi_’] II. adv. _alone, only, severally_.

ānlīpnes f. _loneliness_.

ānlīpum (ēp) _singly_, MtR 26^22.

ānlȳp- = ānlīp-

ānmēde n. _unanimity, concord_, #PPs# 54^13.

anmēdla m. _pomp, glory_: _pride, presumption, arrogance_: _courage_.
[mōd]

+anmettan _to encourage_, AO. [mōd]

anmitta m. _weight, balance, scales_, #Gl#. [and, mitta]

anmōd _steadfast, resolute, eager, bold, brave, fierce, proud_, CP. adv.
-līce.

ānmōd _of one mind, unanimous_, _El_; Æ. [‘_anmod_’] adv. -līce.

anmōdnes f. _steadfastness, resolution_, #Lcd# 3·170^22.

ānmōdnes f. _unity, unanimity_, CP.

ann pres. 3 sg. of unnan.

anna = heonu

ānne (AO, CP) v. ān.

ānnes f. _oneness, unity_, _BH_; Æ: _agreement, covenant_, _Chr_:
_solitude_, _Gu_. [‘_annesse_’]

ānnihte adv. _one day old_, #Lcd#.

anoða = anda

ānpæð † m. _narrow path_.

anpolle f. (Æ) = ampella

anr- = onr-

ānrǣd _of one mind, unanimous_: _constant, firm, persevering, resolute_,
_Æ_. [‘_anred_’]

ānrǣdlic _constant, resolute_: _undoubting_, #Bl# 13^13. adv. -līce
_unanimously_: _resolutely, persistently, constantly, earnestly_, Æ:
_definitely, decidedly_.

ānrǣdnes f. _unanimity, agreement_: _constancy, firmness, diligence_,
_AO_; Æ. [‘_anrednesse_’]

ānreces (#Chr# 1010#cde#) = ānstreces

ānrēd- = ānrǣd-

ans- = ands-, ons-, uns-

an-scēatan (Cp), -scēotan (Erf) = onscēotan

ānseld m. _lonely dwelling, hermitage_, #Gu# 1214.

ānsetl n. _hermitage_, RB 135^9.

ansetla m. _anchorite, hermit_, GD, RB.

ansīen I. (on-; ē, ī, ȳ) fn. _countenance, face_, _CP, Lk_: _form,
figure, presence_: _view, aspect, sight, thing seen_, _AO_: _surface_.
[‘_onsene_’] II. † f. _lack, want_.

anspel n. _conjecture_.

anspilde _salutary_, #Lcd# 11b.

ānsprǣce _speaking as one_, #PPs# 40^7.

ānstandende ptc. _standing alone_, RB 9^7. as sb. _hermit_, Æ.

ānstapa m. _lonely wanderer_, #Pa# 15.

ānstelede _one-stalked, having one stem_, #Lcd#.

ānstīg f. _narrow path_? #Gl#.

ānstonde = ānstandende

ānstræc (ǣ?) _resolute, determined_, CP.

ānstreces (ē?) _at one stretch, continuously, continually_, #Chr#
894#a#.

ansund _sound, whole, entire, perfect, healthy_, Æ (on-).

an-sundnes, -sumnes f. _soundness, wholeness, integrity_.

ānsunu m. _only son_.

ānswēge _harmonious, accordant_.

ansȳn = ansīen

ant- = and-, ont-, unt-

Antecrist m. _Antichrist_. [_L._]

antefn m. _antiphon, ‘anthem,’_ _BH_; Æ.

antefnere m. _book of antiphons, antiphonary_, CM.

antemnere, antifonere (ÆP 154^6) = antefnere.

āntīd f. _similar time_ (_i.e._ the corresponding time of a following
day)? B 219.

antre f. _radish_, #Lcd#.

ānum _alone, solely_, Æ.

anunder = onunder

anung f. _zeal_, NG.

ānunga _at once, forthwith_: _entirely, altogether, throughout, by all
means, uninterruptedly_, B: _necessarily, certainly_.

anw- = andw-, onw-, unw-

ānwedd n. _security, pledge_, TC 201^16.

ānwīg n. _single combat, duel_, Æ, AO.

ānwīglīce _in single combat_, WW 512^21.

ānwiht = āwuht

ānwille I. adj. _wilful, obstinate_, _CP, WW_; Æ. [‘_onwill_’] II. adv.
_wilfully, obstinately_.

ānwillīce _obstinately_, CP.

ānwilnes f. _self-will, obstinacy, persistence_, CP. mid ānwilnesse
_wantonly, wilfully_.

ānwintre adj. _one year old, yearling_.

ānwīte n. _single fine_, LL 64, 31, 1.

anwlōh (#Dan# 585) = onwealg?

ānwuht = āwuht

ānwunung f. _solitary abode_, RB 134^12.

ānwylnes = ānwilnes

anxsum- = angsum-

ānȳdan = ānīdan

anȳhst = anīhst  [[headword spelled “anihst”]]

ānyman = āniman

anȳwan = onȳwan

apa m. ‘_ape_,’ _Gl, Lcd_.

āpǣcan _to seduce, lead astray_.

āpǣran _to avert, pervert_.

āparian _to discover, apprehend_, EC 164.

apelder- = apuldor-

āpinsian _to weigh, estimate, ponder, recount_, CP. [_L._ pensare]

āpinsung f. _weighing_, OEG 1757.

apl = appel

āplantian _to plant_, Æ.

āplatod _plated with metal_? _resplendent_? _OEG_. [v. ‘_plate_’]

āpluccian _to pluck off_, #ÆGr# 170^14.

apostata m. _apostate_, LL (322^14).

apostol (#Chr#), apostel m. ‘_apostle_,’ _MtR_: _disciple_, ÆH 1^520.
[_L._ apostolus; from _Gk._]

apostolhād m. _apostleship_.

apostolic _apostolic_, _BH_; Æ. [‘_apostly_’]

appel, apple == æppel

Aprelis m. _April_, #Men# 56.

āpriccan _to prick_, W 146^21.

aprotane f. _southernwood, wormwood_, #Lcd# 22a. [_L._ abrotonum; from
_Gk._]

apulder, apuldor fm. _apple-tree_.

apuldorrind f. _bark of apple-tree_, #Lcd#.

apuldortūn m. _apple-orchard_, WW (e^3).

apuldre, apuldur = apulder

āpullian _to pull_, #Lcd# 1·362^10.

āpundrian? _to measure out, requite_? #El# 580 (GK).

āpyffan _to exhale, breathe out_, #Gl#.

āpyndrian _to weigh_, #HGl# 512^78? (BT).

āpȳtan _to put out (eyes)_, NC 338.

ār m. I. † _messenger, servant, herald, apostle, angel_. [_Got._ airus]
II. f. ‘_oar_,’ _Chr, Gn_. III. f. _honour, worth, dignity, glory,
respect, reverence_, _BH, Gen, JnLR, Ph_; AO, CP: _grace, favour,
prosperity, benefit, help_, _B_: _mercy, pity_, #An#: _landed property,
possessions, revenue_, Æ, AO: _ecclesiastical living, benefice_:
_ownership_, LL: _privilege_, LL, 76, 42, 2. [‘_are_,’ ‘_ore_’] IV. n.
_ore, brass, copper_, Æ, AO, CP. V. (NG) = ǣr

āracsian = ārāsian

ārǣcan wv. _to reach, get at_, _Chr_: _hold forth, reach out_, Æ: _get
(a thing for a person)_, _Æ, Gr_. [‘_areach_’]

ārǣd I. (ē) m. _welfare_, LL 184n. II. _prepared_?, _resolute_? #Wa# 5;
#GnE# 192? III. = ānrǣd

āræda (#Bo# 46^22) = āroda? v. ārod.

ārǣdan^1 (but usu. wk.) _to appoint, prepare_: _arrange, settle,
decide_, _BH_: _guess, prophesy, interpret, utter_, _Lk, Bo, Da, CP_:
_read, read out, read to (any one)_, CP. [‘_aread_’]

ārǣdnes f. _condition, stipulation_, BH.

ārǣfan _to set free, unwrap_, WW.

āræfnan, -ian _to carry out, accomplish_: _endure, suffer_, Æ, AO: _keep
in mind, ponder_, Æ. [æfnan]

āræfniendlic _endurable, possible_.

ārǣman _to raise, elevate (oneself)_, Æ: (†) _rise, stand up_.

āræpsan (*-ræf-) _to intercept_, #Gl#.

ārǣran _to lift up, raise, set up, create, establish_, _Chr, An, Jn_:
_build, erect_, _Jn_: _rear (swine)_, LL 449: _spread, disseminate_:
_disturb, upset_. ūp ā. _bring up, raise up, exalt_. [‘_arear_’]

ārǣrend m. _one who arouses_.

ārǣrnes f. _raising, elevation_, AO.

ārǣsan _to rush_, ÆH 140^13.

ārāfian _to unravel, disentangle_, CP.

ārāsian _to lay open, search out, test, detect, discover_: _reprove,
correct_, CP. ārāsod _skilled_.

ārblæd n. _oar-blade_, Æ.

arblast m. _cross-bow_, #Chr# 1079#d#. [_OFr._ arbaleste]

arc mf. (also earc, earce) _ark, coffer, chest, box_, Æ. [_L._ arca]

arce (æ, e) m. _archiepiscopal pallium_.

arcebisceop (æ^1, e^1, y^3, eo^4) m. ‘_archbishop_,’ _CP, Chr, KC_.

arcebiscopdōm m. _post of archbishop_.

arcebiscophād (eo) m. _post of archbishop_, BH 49^23.

arcebiscoprīce n. _post of archbishop_, _Chr_.

arcebiscopstōl m. _archiepiscopal see_.

arcedīacon m. ‘_archdeacon_,’ _WW_.

arcehād (e) m. _post of archbishop_.

arcerīce n. _archbishopric_.

arcestōl (æ^1) m. _archiepiscopal see_, #Chr#.

ārcræftig _respected, honourable_, #Da# 551.

ārdǣde _merciful_, #Bl# 131^2.

ārdagas mp. _festival days_, WW 206^31.

ardlic = arodlic

āre f. = ār III.

ārēafian _to separate, divide_, #Ex# 290.

āreccan _to spread out, put forth, stretch out_: _lift up, erect, build
up_: _say, relate, declare, speak out, explain, expound, translate_,
_MtR_; CP: _astonish_: _adorn_? _deck_? #Rim# 10. [‘_arecche_’]

ārēcelēasian _to be negligent_, A 9·102^68.

ared = arod

ārēd I. = ārǣd I. II. (strong) pret. 3 sg. of ārǣdan.

āreddan = āhreddan

ārēdian _to make ready, devise, provide, arrange, carry out_, CP: _find,
find one’s way, reach_: _find out, understand_. [rǣde]

ārēdnes = ārǣdnes

ārēfnan = ārǣfnan  [[headword spelled “āræfnan”]]

ārencan _to make proud, exalt_, A 11·117^32? (BT).

ārendan _to tear off_, #Lcd# 101a.

ārēodian _to redden, blush_, #BPs#.

ārēosan = āhrēosan

ārēran = ārǣran

ārētan _to cheer, gladden_, Æ. [rot]  [[main entry spelled “rot”]]

arewe = arwe

ārfæst _respected, honest, pious, virtuous_, Æ, CP: _merciful, gracious,
compassionate_, Æ: _respectful_.

ārfæstlic _pious_. adv. -līce.

ārfæstnes f. _virtue, honour, grace, goodness, piety_: _pity, mercy_, Æ.

ārfæt nap. -fatu, n. _brazen vessel_, Æ.

ārfest = ārfæst

ārful _respected, venerable_: _favourable, kind, merciful_:
_respectful_. adv. -līce _graciously_, Æ.

arg (NG) = earg

argang = earsgang

ārgeblond m. _tumult of the sea_, #An# 383.

argentille f. _argentilla (plant)_, #Gl#. [_L._]

ārgēotere m. _brass-founder_, AO 54^20.

ārgesweorf n. _brass filings_, #Lcd# 30b.

ārgeweorc n. _brass-work_, WW 398^24.

ārgifa m. _giver of benefits_, #Cra# 11.

arhlīce = earhlīce  [[under “earglic”]]

ārhwæt _eager for glory_, †#Chr# 937#a#.

±ārian _to honour, respect_, Æ, CP: _endow_: _regard, care for, favour,
be merciful to, spare, pardon_, _Æ_; CP. [‘_are_’]

ārīdan^1 _to ride_, AO 118^33.

āriddan = āhreddan

ārigend mf. _benefactor, benefactress_.

āriht _‘aright,’ properly_, _LL_.

ārīman _to number, count, enumerate_, _CP_; AO: _relate_. [‘_arime_’]

ārinnan^3 _to run out, pass away_, #Sol# 479.

ārīsan I. (sv^1) _to ‘arise,’ get up_, _CP, Æ, MtL_: _rise_, _Mk_:
_spring from, originate_: _spring up, ascend_, _El_. II. = +rīsan I.

ārist = ǣrist

ārlēas _dishonourable, base, impious, wicked_, Æ, CP: _cruel_, #Jul# 4.
[_Ger._ ehrlos] adv. -līce Æ.

ārlēasnes f. _wickedness_, BH, #Bo#.

ārlēast f. _disgraceful deed_, #Met#.

ārlic _honourable_: _fitting, agreeable, proper_, AO: _delicious_.

ārlīce adv. I. _honourably, becomingly, graciously, kindly, pleasantly,
mercifully_, CP. II. (N) = ǣrlīce

ārloc n. _‘oarlock,’ rowlock_, WW 288^6.

arm = earm

armelu _‘harmala,’ wild rue_, _Lcd_.

ārmorgen = ǣrmorgen

arn pret. 3 sg. of iernan.

arnian = earnian

+arnung = +earnung

arod I. _quick, bold, ready_, CP. II. m? _a kind of plant, arum_?

ārod pp. of ārian.

arodlic _quick_. adv. -līce _quickly_: _vigorously_, Æ, CP.

arodnes f. _spirit, boldness_, CP 41^17.

arodscipe m. _energy, dexterity_, CP.

aron (NG) used as pres. pl. of wesan.

ārsāpe f. _verdigris_. [sāpe]

ārscamu f. _shame, modesty_, #PPs# 68^19.

ārsmið m. _coppersmith_.

ārstæf † m. (often in pl.) _support, assistance, kindness, benefit,
grace_.

art, arð (NG) = eart, pres. 2 sg. of wesan.

ārðegn m. _servant_, BH 378^11.

ārðing n. _a thing of value_, LkR 21^1.

arud == arod

ārung f. _honour, respect, reverence_, AO: _pardon_.

ārunnen = āurnen, pp. of ārinnan.

arwe (rew-, ruw-) f. ‘_arrow_,’ _LL, Chr_.

ārwela † m. _watery realm_, #An# 855. [ēar]

ār-weorð, -weorðe _honourable, venerable, revering, pious_, CP. adv.
-weorðe.

ārweorðful _honourable_, Æ (u^2).

±ārweorðian _to honour, reverence, worship, extol_.

ārweorðlic _venerable, honourable_. adv. -līce _honourably,
reverentially, solemnly, kindly_, _Æ_. [‘_arworthly_’]

ārweorðnes f. _reverence, honour_, CP.

ārweorðung f. _honour_. #Ps#.

ārwesa _respected_, RB 115^20.

ārwierðe == ārweorð

ārwiððe f. _oar-thong, rowlock_, Æ.

arwunga, arwunge (A) = earwunga

ārwurð, -wyrð == ārweorð

āryddan, -rydran, -rytran _to strip, plunder_, #Gl#, WW.

ārȳderian _to blush_, #BRPs# 69^4.

ārȳpan _to tear off, strip_, #Rd# 76^7.

ārȳð f. _wave of the sea_, #An# 532. [ēar]

āsadian _to satiate, surfeit_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

āsæcgan = āsecgan

āsægdnes = onsægednes

āsǣlan † _to bind, fetter, ensnare_.

āsændan = āsendan

asal, asald (NG) = esol

āsānian _to droop, flag_, #Gu# 1148, LV 57.

āsāwan^7 _to sow, sow with_, Æ.

asca (NG) m. = asce

āscacan = āsceacan

āscādan = āscēadan

āscæcan = āsceacan

āscæfen pp. of āsceafan.

āscǣre = ǣscǣre  [[headword spelled “ǣscære”]]

āscafan = āsceafan

āscamelic _shameful_, #HGl# 500.

āscamian (ea) _to feel shame_, _Ps, Cr_. [‘_ashame_’]

ascas nap. of æsc.

ascbacen (ax-) _baked on ashes_, GD 86^30.

asce (æ, cs, x) f. _(burnt) ‘ash,’_ _Lcd_: _dust (of the ground)_,
_MtL_.

āsceacan^6 (a) _to shake off, remove_, _Mt_: _depart, flee, desert,
forsake_, _Æ_: _shake, brandish_. [‘_ashake_’]

āscēadan^7 (ā) _to separate, hold aloof or asunder, exclude_, CP: _make
clear, cleanse, purify_.

āsceafan (a) _to shave off_, #Lcd#.

āscealian _to peel off_, WW.

āsceamian = āscamian

āscearpan = āscirpan

āscellan = āscillan, āscilian  [[both under “āscilian”]]

āscēofan = āscūfan

āsceon- = onscun-

āsceortian = āscortian

āscēotan^2 _to shoot, shoot out_, Æ, AO: _drop out, fall_, Æ: _lance_
(surgery), ÆL 20^63: _eviscerate_, OEG 46^47.

āsceppan = āscieppan

āsceran = āsciran

āscerian = āscirian

āscerpan (#VPs#) = āscirpan

āscian (ācs-, āhs-, āx-) _to ‘ask,’ inquire, seek for, demand_, _Æ, KC,
WG_, etc.; CP: _call, summon_, _B, Gen_: (+) _learn by inquiry,
discover, hear of_, #Chr#: (†) _announce_.

āsciendlic (āx-) _interrogative_, #ÆGr# 260^14.

āscieppan^6 _to make, create_, _Ex_: _appoint, determine, assign_, AO.
[‘_ashape_’]

āscihhan = āscyhhan

ascildan _to protect_, DR.

āscilian _to separate, divide_, v. OEG 1367n.; FM 100.

āscīmian _to shine_, #Lcd# 2·232.

āscīnan^1 _to flash or shine forth, beam, radiate, be clear_, GD.

āsciran † _to cut off, cut away_.

āscirian _to cut off, separate, divide, remove_, Æ: _set free, deprive
of_: _arrange, destine_.

āscirigendlic _disjunctive_, #ÆGr# 259^14 (y^2).

āscirpan _to sharpen, make acute_, CP.

āscortian (eo) _to become short, fail_, Æ: _pass away, elapse_.

āscrēadian _to prune, lop_.

āscrencan _to displace, trip up, cause to stumble_, _CP_.
[‘_aschrench_’]

āscrepan^5 _to scrape, clear away_.

āscrincan^3 _to shrink up_.

āscrūdnian (ūtn) _to investigate, examine_.

āscūfan^2 _to drive out, remove, expel, banish_, Æ: _push (away)_, _give
up (to)_.

ascun- = onscun-

±āscung f. _‘asking,’ questioning, inquiring, question_, _Met, Bo_;
Æ, CP.

āscyhhan _to scare away, reject_, #RPs# 50^13.

āscylfan _to destroy_, GPH 393^49.

āscylian, āscyllan = āscilian

āscyndan _to separate, part (from)_: _drive away (from)_, Æ.

āscyr- = āscir-

āscȳran _to make clear_, Æ. [scīr]

āsealcan (#Gen# 2167) = āseolcan

āsēarian _to wither, dry up_, _Lcd_; CP. [‘_asear_’]

āsēcan _to seek out, select_: _search out, examine, explore_: _seek for,
require, ask_, _PPs_: _search through, penetrate_. [‘_aseek_’]

āsecgan I. _to say out, express, tell, utter, narrate, explain,
announce_, AO. II. = onsecgan

āsecgendlic _utterable_, Æ.

āsēdan (œ̄) _to satiate_, #Gl#. [sæd]

āsegendnes f. _an offering_, #Nar# 24^17.

āsellan _to give up, hand over, deliver_: _expel, banish_.

āsencan _to sink, immerse_, OEG 829.

āsendan _to send away, send off, send, give up_, _Mt_; Æ. [‘_asend_’]

āsengan (#Jul# 313) = āsecgan

āseolcan^3 _to become slack, remiss, relaxed, weak_, Æ, CP.

āsēon I. sv^5 _to look upon, behold_, HL 16^255. II. sv^1 _to strain_,
#Lcd#.

āseonod _relaxed_, WW 228^25. [seonu]  [[under “seono”]]

āsēoðan^2 _to seethe, boil_, CP: _refine, purify_: _examine_.

āsēowan _to sew_, Cp 421#p# (io).

āsetnes f. _institute, law_, LL.

asettan = onsettan

āsettan _to set, put, place, fix, establish, appoint, set up or in,
erect, build, plant_, _AO, Mt_; Æ: _transport oneself over, cross (the
sea, etc.)_: _take away_, LL 11[12]. sīð _or_ sīðas ā. _to perform a
journey, travel_.

āsēðan _to affirm, confirm_, Æ. [sōð]

āsīcan I. sv^1 _to sigh_, #Sc#. II. _to wean_, #CPs# 130^2.

āsiftan _to sift_, #Lcd# 13b.

āsīgan^1 _to sink, sink down, decline, fall down_, _Chr_; CP. [‘_asye_’]

āsincan^3 _to sink down, fall to pieces_, Æ.

āsingan^3 _to sing out, sing, deliver (a speech)_, _compose
(verse)_, BH.

āsittan^5 _to dwell together, settle_, _El_: _apprehend, fear_: _run
aground_. ūt a. _starve out_. [‘_asit_’]

āslacian _to become slack, decline, diminish_, Æ, CP: _grow tired_:
_make slack, loosen, relax, dissolve_.

āslacigendlic _remissive_, #ÆGr# 228^5.

āslæccan _to slacken, loosen_, WW.

āslæcian = āslacian

āslǣpan^7 (ā) _to slumber, dream_: _be paralysed_, #Lcd#.

āslǣwan _to blunt, weaken, make dull_, OEG 18b, 65.

āslāpan = āslǣpan

āslāwian _to become sluggish, be torpid_, CP. [slāw]

āslēan^6 _to strike, beat, cut_, Æ: _erect_: _make way_: _paralyse_.
of ā. _strike off, behead_, _MtL_; AO. [‘_aslay_’]

āslēpen = āslēopen pret. opt. 3 pl. of āslūpan.

āslīdan^1 _to slide, slip, fall_, _Ps_; Æ, CP. [‘_aslide_’]

āslīding f. _slipping_, GPH 388^62.

āslītan^1 (ȳ) _to slit, cleave, cut off, destroy_, CP.

āslūpan^2 _to slip off, escape, disappear_ (of), _Ps_. [‘_aslip_’]

āslȳtan = āslītan

āsmēagan _to consider, examine, investigate, devise, elicit, treat of,
think_, Æ: _look for, demand_.

āsmēagung f. _scrutiny, consideration_.

āsmēan = āsmēagan

±āsmir-ian, -wan _to smear, anoint_.

āsmiðian _to do smith’s work, fashion, forge, fabricate_, Æ.

āsmorian _to smother, strangle_, AO, CP.

āsmorung f. _choking, suffocation_, #Lcd# 18a.

āsmūgan = āsmēagan

āsnǣsan (ā^2) _to spit, impale, stab_, _LL_ 68, 36. [‘_asnese_’]

asnīðan^1 _to cut off_, #Lcd#.

āsoden (WW 20^44) pp. of āsēoðan.

āsolcen (pp. of āseolcan) _sluggish, idle, indifferent, dissolute_, Æ.

āsolcennes f. _sleepiness, sloth, laziness_, _W_; Æ. [‘_aswolkeness_’]

āsolian _to become dirty_, A 2·374.

āspanan^6 _to allure, seduce, persuade, urge, insinuate_, AO.

āspannan^7 _to unbind, unclasp_, GD 214^24.

āsparian _to preserve_, GD 159^24.

āspeaft (JnL 9^6) = āspeoft

āspēdan _to survive, escape_, #An# 1628.

āspelian _to be substitute for, represent, take the place of_, LL, RB.
ā. fram _be exempt from_.

āspendan _to spend (money)_, _expend, distribute, squander, consume_,
_AO_; Æ. [‘_aspend_’]

āspeoft pret. 3 sg. _spit out_, JnR 9^6. [v. speoft]

āsperian = āspyrian

aspide m. _asp, adder, serpent, viper_, _Ps_; Æ. [‘_aspide_’]

āspillan _to destroy_, JnL 12^10.

āspinnan^3 _to spin_, WW.

āspirian = āspyrian

āspīwan^1 (ȳ) _to spew up, vomit_, Æ, CP.

āsplǣtan ?_to split_. v. ES 49·156.

āspornan _to cast down_, #EPs# 145^7. [spurnan]

āsprēadan _to stretch out, extend_, #EPs# 35^11.

āsprecan _to speak out, speak_, #PPs#.

āsprengan _to cause to spring, fling out_, ÆL 8^213.

āsprettan = āspryttan

āsprindlad _ripped up_, #Lcd# 80b.

āspringan^3 (y) _to spring up or forth, break forth, spread_, _Æ_; AO:
_arise, originate, be born_, _Æ_: _dwindle, diminish, fail, cease_.
āsprungen _dead_. [‘_aspring_’]

āspringung f. _failing_, #VPs# 141^4.

āspritan = āspryttan

āsproten pp. of āsprūtan.

ā-sprungennes, -sprungnes f. _failing, exhaustion, death_: _eclipse_.

āsprūtan^2 (= ēo) _to sprout forth_, #PPs# 140^9.

āspryngan = āspringan

āspryttan^1 (e, i) _to sprout out, bring forth_, Æ.

āspylian _to wash oneself_, #Bo# 115^7.

āspyrgend m. _tracker, investigator_, VHy.

āspyrging f. ‘_adinventio_,’ WW 513^15.

āspyrian (i) _to track, trace out, investigate, explore, discover_.

āspȳwan = āspīwan

assa m. _he-ass_, _Mt, Jn, Æ_; CP. [‘_ass_’]

assen f. _she-ass_.

assmyre f. _she-ass_, Æ.

āst f. _kiln_, _WW_ 185^30; A 9·265. [‘_oast_’]

āstǣgan _to go up, embark_, MkR 6^32.

āstǣlan _to lay to one’s charge_, LL (264^15).

āstǣnan^1 _to adorn with precious stones_.

āstærfan (_MtR_) = āstyrfan

āstandan^6 _to stand up, stand forth, rise up, arise_, _B_; Æ:
_continue, endure_, _Lk_; CP. [‘_astand_’]

āstandennes f. _perseverance_, ÆL 23b^272: _existence, subsistence_.

āstēapan = āstȳpan

āstellan I. _to set forth, set, put, afford, supply, display, appoint_,
AO, CP: _set up, establish, confirm, institute, ordain, undertake,
start_, _AO_; Æ: _undergo_, Æ. II. _to fly off, rush_.

āstemnian _to build_.

āstemped _engraved, stamped_, WW 203^27.

āstencan _to scatter_, GD 42^33.

āstēopan = āstȳpan

āsteorfan^3 _to die_, MH 62^27.

āstēp- = āstȳp-

āsterian = āstyrian

asterion _‘asterion,’ pellitory_, _Lcd_ 1·164.

āstīfian _to become stiff_, Æ.

āstīfician = āstȳfecian

āstīgan^1 _to proceed, go_, Æ: (usu. w. ūp, niðer, _etc._) _rise, mount,
ascend, descend_, _Jn_; Æ, CP: _be puffed up_, AO 264^8. [‘_astye_’]

āstīgend m. _rider_.

āstigian _to ascend, mount_.

āstīgnes f. _ascent_, #EPs# 103^4.

āstihtan _to determine on, decree_, #Chr# 998.

āstihting (OEG) = ātihting  [[redirected to “ātyhting”]]

āstillian _to still, quiet_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

āstingan^3 _to bore out, pierce out_, #Chr#: _stab_.

āstintan = āstyntan

āstirian = āstyrian

āstīðian _to become hard, dry tip, wither_: _grow up, come of age_, TC
203^20.

āstondnes = āstandennes

āstrǣlian _to cast forth_, #RPs# 75^9.

āstreccan _to stretch out, stretch forth, extend, lay low_, _Æ_:
_prostrate oneself, bow down_, CP. [‘_astretch_’]

āstregdan _to sprinkle_.

āstregdnes? f. _sprinkling_, DR.

āstrenged _(made strong), malleable_, WW.

āstrīenan (ēo, ȳ) _to beget_.

āstrogden pp. of āstregdan.

āstrowenes f. _length_, #HGl# 443.

āstrȳnan = āstrīenan

āstundian _to take upon oneself_, Æ.

āstȳfecian _to suppress, eradicate_, CP.

āstyllan = āstellan

āstyltan _to be astonished_, LkLR.

āstyntan (i) _to blunt, repress, restrain, stop, overcome_, _Gl_.
[‘_astint_’]

āstȳpan (ē, ēa, ēo) _to deprive, bereave_, GD. āstȳpte _orphans_.
[stēop]

  [[Printed as shown, but reference may be to “stēop-” as word
  element.]]

āstȳp(ed)nes (ē^2) f. _privation, bereavement_.

āstȳran _to guide, control_, AS 9^16.

āstyrfan (æ, e) _to kill, destroy_, _Cr, Mt_ (e). [‘_asterve_’]

āstyrian _to stir up, excite, move, move forward, raise_, _Jn, Mk_; Æ:
_be roused, become angry_, Æ. āstyred weorðan _be or become anxious_, Æ.
[‘_astir_’]

āstyriendlic v. un-ā.  [[under “unāstyriende”]]

āstyrigend m. ‘_ventilator_,’ GPH 393^78.

āstyrred _starry_, #Sc#.

āstyrung f. _motion_, #Lcd#.

ā-sūcan^2 -sūgan _to suck, suck out, drain_.

ā-sundran, -sundron = onsundran

āsundrian = āsyndrian  [[under “āsyndran”]]

āsūrian _to be or become sour_, WW.

āswǣman _to roam, wander about_: _pine, grieve_, Æ.

āswǣrn- = āswarn-

āswǣtan _to burst out in perspiration_, MH 20^12.

āswāmian _to die away_, #Gen# 376: _cease_.

āswāpan^7 (but pp. āswōpen) _to sweep away, remove, clean_, CP.

āswārcan _to languish_, #LPs# 38^12.

āswārcian _to confound_, #BSPs# 70^24.

āswārnian _to be confounded_, #Ps#.

āswārnung f. _shame, confusion_, #LPs# 43^16.

āswaðian _to investigate_, OEG 5^11.

āsweartian _to turn livid, become ashy or black_, CP.

āswebban † _to lull, soothe, set at rest_: _put to death, destroy_,
_Jud_. [‘_asweve_’]

āswellan^3 _to swell_, CP.

āsweltan^3 _to die_, #Chr#.

āswencan _to afflict_, DR.

āswengan _to swing off, shake off, cast forth_.

āsweorcan^3 _to droop_, Æ.

āsweorfan^3 _to file off, polish_, GPH.

āswēpa = ǣswǣpe

āswerian^6 _to swear_, #PPs#.

āswīcan^1 _to desert, abandon, betray, deceive_, _Mt_: _offend,
irritate, provoke_. [‘_aswike_’]

±āswician _to offend_.

āswicung f. _scandal, offence_.

āswīfan^1 _to wander, stray_, WW.

āswind = ǣswind

āswindan^3 _to become weak, shrink, fade away, perish, decay, dissolve_,
_Bo_; Æ, CP. [‘_aswind_’]

āswingan^3 _to scourge_, DR.

āswōgan^7 _to cover over, choke_, CP 411^17.

āsworettan _to sigh, grieve_, GD.

āswornian (NC 271) = āswarnian  [[headword spelled “āswārnian”]]

āswundennes f. _idleness_, BH 160^25.

āsynderlic _remote_, OEG 2514.

±āsynd-ran, -rian _to separate, divide, disjoin, sever_, CP, Æ:
_distinguish, except_. [‘_asunder_’]

āsyndrung f. _division_, WW.

at == æt

ātǣfran (CP 467^19) = ātīefran

ātǣsan _to wear out, injure, strike, smite_, Æ: _wound_, CP 296^18.

atāwian = ætīewan

āte (æ) f. ‘_oats_,’ _Lcd_: _wild oats, tares_, _Gl, WW_.

āteallan = ātellan

ātēfran = ātīefran

ategār = ætgār  [[under “ætgǣre”]]

atel == atol

ātellan _to reckon up, count_, _Bo_; AO. ā. wið _balance against_:
_tell, enumerate_, CP: _explain, interpret_. [‘_atell_’]

ātemian _to tame, subdue, render quiet_, CP.

ātendan _to set on fire, kindle, inflame_, _Chr_: _trouble, perplex_, A
8·312^48. [‘_atend_’]

ātending f. _incentive_, #Sc# 221^17.

ātēon^2 _to draw up, out, off or from, remove, pull out, lead out,
draw_, _B, BH_; AO, CP. ūp ā. _draw up, move away_: _protract_, Æ:
_move, journey, roam_: _deal with, dispose of, apply, use_, _Mt_; Æ, CP.
[‘_atee_’]

ātēorian _to fail, become exhausted, weary, cease_, _Ps_; Æ: _be
defective_, #ÆGr#. [‘_atire_’]

ātēori(g)endlic _transitory, perishable_, Æ: _failing_: _defective_,
#ÆGr#.

ātēorodnes f. _cessation, exhaustion_, HL 3^495; #BPs# 118^53.

ātēorung f. _failing, weariness_, Æ.

ātēowan = ōðīewan  [[headword spelled “oðīewan”]]

āter == ātor

ātēran^4 _to tear away_, CP 359^20.

āteriendlic = āteoriendlic  [[headword spelled “ātēoriendlic”]]

āterima (ētr-) _oat-bran_, #Lcd# 3·292´.

ātertānum dp. _with poisoned twigs (or_? -tearum _with poison drops)_ B
1460.

āteshwōn adv. _at all_, CM 987. [āwiht]

athēd (#Gl#) = æthȳd

ātīdrian _to grow weak_, GD 59^26 (ydd).

ātīefran (ǣ, ē, ī, ȳ) _to draw, depict_, CP.

atīewan = ōðīewan  [[headword spelled “oðīewan”]]

ātiht- = ātyht-

ātillan _to touch, reach_.

ātimbr-an, -ian _to erect, build_, AO, CP.

ātimplian _to provide with spikes_, NC 271.

ātīwan = ōðīewan  [[headword spelled “oðīewan”]]

ātlēag m. _oat-field_?, EC 448^9.

atol I. _dire, terrible, ugly, deformed, repulsive, unchaste_, _B_.
[‘_atel_’] II. † n. _horror, evil_.

atolic, atollic _dire, terrible, deformed, repulsive_, Æ. adv. -līce.

atoliende _disfiguring_, WW 220^26.

ātor, āt(to)r, (ǣ) n. _poison, venom_, _Lcd_; AO, CP: _gall_, _Gl_.
[‘_atter_’]

ātorbǣre _poisonous_, ÆH 1·72^22.

ātorberende _poisonous, venomous_.

ātorcoppe f. _spider_, _Lcd_. [‘_attercop_’]

ātorcræft (āttor-) m. _art of poisoning_, W.

ātorcyn (ǣ) n. _poison_, #Sol# 219.

ātordrinca m. _poisonous draught_, MH.

ātorgeblǣd n. _swelling caused by poison_, #Lcd# 162b.

ātorlāðe f. _plant used as antidote to poison, betonica_? _Lcd, WW_.
[‘_atterlothe_’]

ātorlic _poison-like, bitter_, _WW_. [‘_atterlich_’]

ātorsceaða † m. _poisonous enemy_.

ātorspere n. _poisoned spear_, #Rd# 18^9.

ātorðigen (ātt-) f. _taking of poison_, #Lcd# 1·4^5.

ātr = ātor

ātrahtnian _to treat, discuss_.

ātredan^5 _to extract, extort_, LL.

ātreddan _to search out, examine, investigate_, #PPs#.

ātrendlian _to roll_, _Met_ 5^17. [v. ‘_trendle_’]

ātres gs. of ātor.

atrum n. _ink_, A 13·28^15. [_L._ atramentum]

atter, attor == ātor

attres gs. of attor, ātor.  [[under “atter”]]

attrum = atrum

atul = atol

ātur = ātor

ātwēonian _to cause doubt_, A 8·333^6.

ātyddrian = ātīdrian

ātȳdran _to beget, create_, #El# 1279. [tūdor]

ātȳfran = ātīefran

ātyhtan (i) _to entice, allure, incite_: _be attentive_: _produce_, #Rd#
51^3: _stretch, extend, turn_.

ātyhting (i) f. _intention, aim_: _instigation_, OEG 2^304.

ātymbran = ātimbran

ātȳnan I. _to shut off, exclude_. [tūn] II. = ontȳnan

ātyndan = ātendan

ātȳrian = ātēorian

atȳwan = oðīewan

āð m. ‘_oath_,’ _B, Mt_; AO.

āð- = ōð-

aðamans m. _adamant_, CP 271^2. [_L._]

āðbryce m. _perjury_, W 164^7.

āðecgan _to take food, consume_?: _oppress_? (Tupper) #Rd# 1^2,7.

āðegehāt = āðgehāt

āðegen _distended_, WW.

āðencan _to think out, devise, contrive, invent_, AO: _intend_.

āðenenes f. _extension_, VHy.

ā-ðennan, -ðenian _to stretch out, extend, draw out, expand_, AO: _apply
(the mind)_ CP: _prostrate_.

āðenung f. _extension, distension_.

āðēodan = āðīedan

āðēostrian (ē, īe, ī) _to become dark, obscured, eclipsed_, _Bo_; CP,
#VPs#. [‘_athester_’]

āðer = āhwæðer

āðerscan _to thresh out_, ÆL 31^1217.

āðēstrian = āðēostrian

āðēwan = āðȳwan

āðexe f. _lizard_, OET.

āðfultum m. _confirmation (confirmers) of an oath_, LL.

āðgehāt (āðe-) n. _promise on oath, oath_, WW.

āðiddan _to thrust, push_, OEG 50^3.

āðīedan _to separate_, CP.

āðierran _to clean_, CP.

āðīestrian (CP) = āðēostrian

āðindan^3 _to swell, puff up, inflate, increase_, CP: _melt, pass away_.
(cp. ðindan)

āðindung f. _swelling_, #Lcd# 93a.

ā-ðīstrian, -ðisðrigan (CP) = āðēostrian

āðl (#VPs#) = ādl

āðloga m. _perjurer_, #Cr# 165.

āðol = ādl

āðollan _to hold out, endure, suffer_, Æ.

āðolware mp. _citizens_, #GnE# 201.

āðor = āhwæðer

āðrācian _to dread_: _frighten_.

āðrǣstan _to twist out, wrest out_, #Gl#.

āðrāwan^7 _to curl, twist, twine_, Æ.

āðrēatian _to weary, be irksome_: _force away_, CP 293^10.

āðrēotan^2 (pers. and impers.) _to tire of, weary, be tiresome to,
displease, disgust_, Æ, AO, CP.

āðrescan = āðerscan

āðrīetan _to weary_, Æ, AO (ȳ); #Bo#.

āðringan^3 _to crowd or press out_: _rush forth, break out_. ūt ā.
_emboss_.

āðrīstian _to be bold, presume_, GD 70^30.

āðrotennes f. _wearisomeness_, WW 409^22.

āðrotsum _irksome_, WW 510^12.

āðrōwian _to suffer_, #Lcd# 68b.

āðroxen pp. of āðerscan.

āðrunten (pp. of *āðrintan) _swollen_, #Rd# 38^2. (or ? aðrūten)

āðrūten pp. (of *āðrūtan) _swollen_, #Lcd#.

āðryccan _to press, oppress_.

āðrȳn _to rob_? _drive out_? #Gl#, (ES 43·331).

ā-ðrysemian, -ðrysman (_AO_) _to suffocate, smother_. [‘_athrysm_’]

āðrytnes f. _weariness_.

āðstæf m. _oath_, #CPs# 104^9.

āðswara m? = āðswaru

āðswaring = āðswerung

āðswaru f. _oath-swearing, oath_, Æ.

āðswerian? _to vow with an oath_, WW 387^9.

āðswerung f. _oath-swearing_, #Chr, RSPs# 104^9.

āðswyrd (eo) n. _oath-swearing_, #EPs# 104^9 (ǣ^1); B 2064.

āðum m. _son-in-law_, _Æ_; AO: _brother-in-law_. [‘_odam_’]

āðumswerian mp. _son-in-law and father-in-law_, B 84.

āðundennes f. _swelling, tumour_, #Lcd#: _contumacy_, WW 87^17.

āðwǣnan _to diminish, soften_, #Lcd#.

āðwēan^6 _to wash, wash off, cleanse, baptize, anoint_, Æ, CP.

āðwedd n. _promise on oath_, WW 115^16.

āðweran^4 _to stir up, churn_, #Lcd#.

āðwīnan _to vanish_, NC 338.

āðwītan^1 _to disappoint_, #SPs# 131^11.

āðwyrðe _worthy of credit_. v. LL 2·376.

āðȳan = āðȳwan

āðylgian _to bear up_, #ARSPs#.

āðȳn = āðȳwan

āðynnian (i) _to make thin_, DHy 8^10.

āðȳstrian (Æ) = āðīestrian

āðȳtan I. ‡ _to sound, blow (a horn)_. II. _to expel_, WW 19^12.

āðȳwan _to drive away_, AO: _press out or into, squeeze out_.

āuht = āwiht

āuðer = āhwæðer

āw = ǣ

āwa = ā

āwacan^6 (on-) _to awake_, _Æ_: _arise, originate, spring forth, be
born_. [‘_awake(n)_’]

āwacian _to awake_, Æ.

āwācian _to grow weak, decline, fall, belittle_, Æ, CP: _fall away,
lapse, desist from, abstain_, Æ.

āwacnian = āwæcnian

āwæc- = āwec-

āwǣcan _to weaken, weary_.

āwæc-nian, -nan (on-; a, e) _to awaken, revive_, Æ: _arise, originate,
spring from_, _AO_. [‘_awake(n)_’]

āwǣgan _to deceive_: _destroy, annul, make nugatory_, Æ.

āwǣlan _to roll, roll from_: _harass, afflict_, NG.

āwæltan = āwyltan

āwæmmian = āwemman

āwænd- = āwend-, onwend-

āwænian = āwenian  [[under “āwennan”]]

āwærd pp. of āwierdan.

āwærged = āwierged

āwærian _to avoid_, DR 39^13.

āwæscan = āwascan

āwǣstan = āwēstan

āwandian _to fear, hesitate_, #ÆGr# 162^2.

āwanian _to diminish, lessen_.

āwannian _to become livid or black and blue_, GD 20^32 (v. NC 332).

āwansian _to diminish_, KC 4·243^6.

āwār = āhwǣr

āwārnian (#APs#) = āswārnian

  [[Entry before author’s correction:
  āwārnian _to be confounded_, #SPs#.]]

āwascan^6 (æ) _to wash, bathe, immerse_, #Lcd#.

āweallan^7 _to well up, flow out, break forth, issue, swarm_, CP: _be
hot, burn_.

āweardian _to guard, defend_.

āweaxan^6 _to grow, grow up, arise, come forth_, CP.

āweb = ōweb

āwec- = āwæc-

āweccan _to awake, rouse, incite, excite_, _Mk, Lk_; Æ, CP: _raise up,
beget_. [‘_awecche_’]

āwecenes (æ) f. _incitement_, GD 199^7.

āwecgan _to undermine, shake, move_, Æ.

āwēdan _to be or become mad, rage_, Æ; _AO_. [‘_awede_’; wōd]

āwefan^5 _to weave, weave together_, Æ.

āweg (= on-) _‘away,’ forth, out_, _Chr, Mt_; CP.

āwegan^5 _to lift up, carry away_: _weigh, weigh out_, _Æ_: _estimate,
consider_. [‘_aweigh_’]

āwegāworpnes f. _abortion_, LL (154^34).

āwegcuman^4 _to escape_, Æ.

āwegēade _went away_, _JnL_ 4^50 [v. ‘_away_’; ēode]

āwegflēon^2 _to fly or flee away_, OEG 2169.

āweggān _to go away_, BH 326^10.

āweggewītan^1 _to depart_, AO 74^26.

āweggewitenes f. _departure_, Æ: _aberration (of mind)_, #JPs# 115^11.

āwehtnes f. _arousing_, BH 422^20.

awel m. _hook, fork_, #Gl#.

āwellan = āwyllan

āwemman _to disfigure, corrupt_.

āwemmendnes f. _corruption_.

āwēnan _to consider_.

āwendan (= on-) _to avert, turn aside, remove, upset_, _Ps_: _change,
exchange, alter, pervert_, _Æ_; CP: _translate_, Æ, CP: _turn from, go,
depart_, _Ps_; AO: _return_: _subdue_. [‘_awend_’]

āwendedlic = āwendendlic

āwendednes f. _change, alteration_, Æ.

āwendendlic _that can be changed, changeable_, Æ.

āwendendlīcnes f. _mutability_, Æ.

āwendennes f. _change_, OEG 191.

āwending f. _subversion, change_, ES 39·322.

āwen-nan, -ian _to disaccustom, wean_.

āwēodian _to root out, extirpate_.

āweorpan^3 _to throw, throw away, cast down, cast out, cast aside,
degrade, depose_, _Mt_; Æ, AO, CP. āworpen _divorced, rejected,
destroyed, apostate_. of, ūt ā. _to throw out_. [‘_awarp_’]

āweorpnes = āworpennes

āweorðan^3 _to pass away, vanish, become worthless_, _Mt_; (NG) =
+weorðan. [‘_aworth_’]

āweosung f. ‘_subsistentia_,’ WW 516^4.

āwer = āhwǣr

āwerdan = āwierdan

āwerde (æ^2) m. _worthless fellow_, WW 111^29.

āwerg- = āwierg-, āweri-

āwerian I. _to defend_, AO: _hinder, restrain_, #Chr#: _protect, cover,
surround, enclose_: _ward off from oneself, spurn from oneself_. II. _to
wear, wear out (clothes)_, RB.

āwerpan = āweorpan

āwescnes (#VPs#) = ǣwiscnes

āwēstan _to lay waste, ravage, destroy_, _AO_; Æ. [‘_awest_’]

āwēst(ed)nes f. _desolation, destruction_.

āwēstend m. _devastator_, W 200^19.

āwexen = āweaxen pp. of āweaxan.

+āwian (AS 42^9) = +ēawian

āwīdlian _to profane, defile_.

āwierdan (e, y) _to spoil, injure, hurt, corrupt, seduce, destroy,
kill_, CP.

āwierding (y) f. _corruption, blemish_, #HGl# 421^57.

āwierg-an, -ian (æ, e, i, y) I. _to curse, damn, denounce, outlaw_, _Æ,
Mt, CP_; VPs. sē āwier(ge)da _fiend, devil_. [‘_awarie_’] II. = āwyrgan

āwiht I. n. _‘aught,’ anything, something_, _Ps_. II. adv. _at all, by
any means_. tō āhte _at all_. III. _good, of value_, Æ.

āwildian _to become wild_, Æ, LL.

āwillan = āwyllan

āwille (WW) = ānwille II.

āwindan^3 _to wind, bend, plait_: _slip from, withdraw, escape_, CP:
_become relaxed_? W 148^3.

āwindwian (y) _to winnow, blow away, disperse_, #Ps#.

āwinnan^3 _to labour, strive_, _JnL_: _gain, overcome, endure_, _Da_.
[‘_awin_’]

āwirgan = I. āwyrgan. II. āwyrgian

āwirgnes = āwyrgednes

āwisc- = ǣwisc-

āwisnian _to become dry, wither_.

āwistlian _to hiss_, W 147^37. [hwistlian]

āwlacian _to be or become lukewarm_.

āwlǣtan _to befoul, make loathsome, defile_, Æ.

āwlancian _to exult, to be proud_, OEG 1159.

āwlencan _to make proud, enrich_, DR 59^1.

āwlyspian _to ‘lisp,’_ _MLN_ 4·279 (NC 338).

āwo = ā (āwa)

āwoffian _to become proud, insolent_: _rave, be delirious, insane_, Æ.

āwōgian _to woo_, Æ.

āwōh _(crookedly), wrongfully, unjustly_, LL. [= on wōh]

āwol = āwel

āwolfigan = āwoffian

āwonian (DR) = āwanian

āwor = āfor

āwordennes f. _degeneration_, WW 87^21.

āworpednes (#EPs# 21^7) = āworpennes

āworpenlic _worthy of condemnation_, CP. adv. -līce _vilely_.

ā-worpennes, -worpnes f. _rejection, what is cast away_: _exposure
(of children)_.

āwrǣnan _to make wanton_, #Lcd# 54b.

āwrǣstan _to wrest from, extort_, WW 397^37.

āwrecan^5 _to thrust out, drive away_: _strike, pierce_: _utter, sing,
relate, recite_: _punish, avenge_, _LL, ChrL_. [‘_awreak_’]

āwreccan _to arouse, awake_, Æ.

āwregennes = onwrigenes  [[under “onwrigennes”]]

āwrēon^1,2 (= on-) _to disclose, discover, reveal_: _cover_, NG.

āwreðian _to support, uphold_, CP.

āwrīdian _to originate, spring from_.

āwrigenes = onwrigennes

āwringan^3 _to wring, squeeze out_, Æ.

āwrit n. _a writing_.

āwrītan^1 _to write, write down, describe, compose_, _CP_; Æ, AO, #Chr#:
_mark, inscribe, draw, carve, copy_. [‘_awrite_’]

āwrīðan^1 I. _to turn, wind, bind up, bind, wreathe_. II. = onwrīðan

awrygenes = onwrigenes  [[under “onwrigennes”]]

āwðer, āwðor = āhwæðer

āwuht = āwiht

āwul = āwel

āwuldrian _to glorify_ (N).

āwundrian _to wonder, wonder at, admire_.

āwunian _to remain, continue_, BH.

āwunigende ptc. _continual_.

āwurt-walian, -warian = āwyrtwalian

āwurðan = āweorðan

āwyht = āwiht

āwylian _to roll_, Æ.

āwyllan _to bring into commotion, boil_, Æ.

āwylm = ǣwielm

āwyltan, āwylwan _to roll, roll away_, Æ: _harass_, DR (æ).

āwyndwian = āwindwian

āwyrcan _to do_.

āwyrd- (Æ) = āwierd-

āwyrdla = æfwyrdla

āwyrdnes _hurt, harm, destruction_, Æ: _defilement_.

āwyrg- = āwierg-

āwyrgan (i, ie) _to strangle, suffocate_, _AO_ (i), Æ. [‘_aworry_’]

āwyrgedlic, āwyrgendlic _detestable, shameful, abominable_.

āwyrgednes f. _wickedness_, Æ: _curse, cursing_. [wearg]

āwyrgodnes = āwyrgednes

āwyrigende _accursed_, Æ.

āwyrigung f. _a curse_, Æ.

āwyrn (#Men# 101) = āhwærgen  [[headword spelled “āhwǣrgen”]]

āwyrpan (= ie) _to recover (from illness)_, ÆH 1·534^28.

āwyrtlian = āwyrtwalian

āwyrtwalian _to root out_, CP.

āwyrðung f. _stain, aspersion_, #HGl# 421.

ax- = asc-, ox-

āx- = āsc-

axe = æcs

āȳdan (OEG 8^108) = āīdan

āȳdlian = āīdlian

āyldan _to delay_, GD 21^22. [ieldan]

āyrnan = āiernan

āȳtan _to drive out_. [ūt]

āyttan = āettan




=B=


bā nafn. and am. of bēgen _both_.

bac- v. bæc.

bacan^6 _to ‘bake,’_ Æ.

bacas nap. of bæc II.

bacca m. _ridge_, BC (bacce f. Mdf).

bacu nap. of bæc I.

bād I. f. _forced contribution, impost, pledge_, LL: _expectation_.
[bīdan] II. (±) pret. 3 sg. of bīdan.

-bādere v. nīed-b.

bādian _to take a pledge or fine_, LL.

bæ- = ba-, be-, bea-

bæc I. n. ‘_back_,’ _Bo, MtL, Ps_; CP. on b. _backwards, behind,
‘aback.’ _on b. settan, lǣtan _to neglect_. ofer b. _backwards, back_.
under b. _behind, backwards, back_. ofer b. būgan _to turn back, flee_.
clǣne b. habban _to be straightforward, honest_, LL 128[5]. II. mfn.
_beck, brook_. v. ES 29·411.

bæcbord n. _left side of a ship, larboard_, AO.

bæce = bæc II.

bǣce = bēce

bǣcen- = bēacen-

bæcere I. m. ‘_baker_,’ _Æ_. II. = bæzere

bæcering m. _gridiron_, WW.

bæcern n. _bakery, bakehouse_, Æ.

bæcestre fm. _baker_, Æ. [‘_baxter_’]

bæceð, bæcð, pres. 3 sg. of bacan.

bæcistre = bæcestre

bæcling, bæclinga (on) adv. _backwards, behind_. on b. gewend _having
one’s back turned_, Æ.

bæcslitol adj. _backbiting_, W 72^16.

bæcðearm m. _rectum_; pl. _bowels, entrails_, Æ.

+bæcu np. _back parts_, #LPs#.

bæd I. pret. 3 sg. of biddan. II. = bed

bǣdan _to urge on, impel_, CP: _solicit, require_: _afflict, oppress_.

bædan _to defile_, #EPs# 78^1.

bædd == bedd

bæddæg ‘_epiphania_,’ DR.

bǣddel m. _effeminate person, hermaphrodite_, WW. [v. ‘_bad_’]

bæddryda = bedrida

bædend m. _inciter_, WW.

bǣdewēg n. _drinking vessel_. [wǣge]

bǣdling m. _effeminate or impure male person_, _WW_. [‘_badling_’]

bǣdon pret. pl. of biddan.

bædryda = bedrida

bædzere = bæzere

bæfta, bæftan (_Mt_; Æ) = beæftan

bæftansittende _idle_, #ÆGr# 52^2.

-bæftian (ea^1, a^2) v. hand-b.

bǣg = bēag

bǣgen = bēgen

bǣh = bēag

bǣl n. _fire, flame_, _B_: _funeral pyre, bonfire_. [‘_bale_’]

bǣlblys, -blyse, -blæse † f. _blaze of a fire, funereal blaze_.

bælc I. † m. _pride, arrogance_. II. m. _covering, cloud_? #Ex# 73.

bælcan † _to cry out_.

+bælcan _to root up_, #CPs# 79^14.

bældan = bieldan

bældo (CP), bældu = bieldo

bǣlegsa m. _terror of fire_, #Ex# 121.

bǣlfȳr n. _‘bale-fire,’ funeral or sacrificial fire_, _B_.

bælg, bælig (NG) == belg

bǣlstede m. _place of a funeral pile_, B 3097.

bǣl-ðracu f. (ds. -ðræce) _violence of fire_, #Ph# 270.

bǣlwudu m. _wood for a funeral pile_, B 3112.

bǣlwylm m. _flames of a funeral-fire_, #Jul# 336.

bǣm = bām (v. bēgen)

bænd == bend

+bǣne? _bones_, NC 292.

bǣnen _made of bone_, Æ.

bær I. gsmn. bares _‘bare,’ uncovered_, _Bo_: _naked, unclothed_, _Gen_.
II. pret. 3 sg. of beran.

bǣr I. f. ‘_bier_,’ _El_; Æ: _handbarrow, litter, bed_, _BH, JnR_.
[beran] II. _a pasture_? KC (BT). III. = bār (AB 14·233).

+bǣran _to behave, conduct oneself_, _CP_: _fare_, B 2824: ‘_exultare_,’
#PPs#. [‘_i-bere_’]

bærbær _barbarous_, #EPs# 113^1.

bǣrdisc m. _tray_, WW. [beran]

bære = bere pres. 1 sing. of beran.

bære- = bere-

-bǣre suffix (from beran); forms derivatives from substantives, as in
cwealmbǣre. [_Ger._ -bar]

bǣre == bǣr

+bǣre n. _manner, behaviour_, _El_: _gesture, cry_: _action_.
[‘_i-bere_’; beran]

bærfōt _barefoot_.

bærhtm (A) = bearhtm

bærlic I. adj. _of barley_, KC 6·79^10. II. _open, clear, public_. adv.
-līce.

bǣrmann m. _bearer, porter_, _Æ_. [‘_berman_’]

bærn = bereærn

±bærnan (e) _to cause to burn, kindle, burn, consume_, _Sol_; AO, #VPs#.
[v. ‘_burn_’]

bærnelāc (e) n. _burnt-offering_, #PPs#.

+bǣrnes f. _bearing, manner_, WW 529^13.

bærnett (y^2) n. _burning, burn, cautery_, Æ: _arson_, LL.

bærning f. _burning_: _burnt offering_, #BPs# 50^18.

bærnīsen n. _branding-iron_, OEG 7^113.

bærnnes, bærnes f. _burning_.

bæro = bearu

bǣron pret. pl. of beran.

bærs m. _a fish, perch_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ barsch]

+bǣrscipe (LkL) = +bēorscipe

bærst pret. 3 sg. of berstan.

bærstl- = brastl-

bærsynnig m. _notoriously wicked person, publican_, NG.

+bǣru v. +bǣre.

bærwe = bearwe

bæst mn.? _inner bark of trees, ‘bast,’_ _Æ, OET_.

bæsten _made of bast_.

bæstere = bæzere

bǣtan I. _to bait, hunt, worry_, Æ. [v. ‘_bait_’]: (BT) _make fast_?
(Sedgef. = III). II. _to beat against the wind_? #Bo# 144^31. [_ON._
beita] III. _to furnish with a bit or bridle, saddle, curb_.

+bǣte, +bǣtel n. _bit, bridle_, pl. _trappings_, BH.

bætera, bættra = betera

bǣtung (ē) f. _beating_ (_against the wind_?) (BT), _cable_ (Sedgef.),
#Bo# 144^31.

bæð n. nap. baðu _‘bath,’ action of bathing_, _Lcd_: _laver_, _AO_:
_liquid in which one bathes, medicinal spring_, _BH, KC_. ganotes b.
_gannet’s bath_ (i.e. the sea), B.

bæðcere m. _bather_.

bæðere = bæzere

bæðern n. _bath-house_, NC 272.

bæðfæt n. _bathing-tub_, LL 455[17].

bæðhūs n. _bathing-place_, Æ.

bæðian = baðian

bæðsealf f. _bathing-salve_, #Lcd#.

bæðstede m., bæðstōw f. _bathing-place_, WW.

bæðweg † m. _sea_.

bæzere m. _baptiser, baptist_. [= _L._ baptista]

bal- = beal-

balc, balca m. _bank, ridge_, _Bo, WW_. [‘_balk_’]

ballīce (NG) = bealdlīce

bal-sam, -samum n. _‘balsam,’ balm_, _BH_.

balsmēðe f. _bergamot_, #Lcd# 3·90^23.

balsminte f. _balsam-mint, water-mint_, WW 136^6.

balzam n., balzame f. = balsam

bām dmfn. of bēgen.

+ban = +bann

±bān n. _‘bone,’ tusk_, _Jn, Æ, Gl_; AO, CP: _the bone of a limb_.

bana (o) m. _killer, slayer, murderer_, _B_; #Chr#: _the devil_: (f.)
_murderess_, A 10·155. [‘_bane_’]

bānbeorge f. _leg-armour, greaves_, WW.

bānbryce m. _fracture of a bone_, #Lcd#.

bāncofa † m. _the bodily frame_.

ban-coða m., -coðu f. _baneful disease_.

band pret. 3 sg. of bindan.

bānece _in pain in the thigh_, #Lcd#.

bān-fæt † n. nap. -fatu _body, corpse_.

bānfāg _adorned with bonework_ (deer antlers?), B 781.

bangār (o) m. _murdering spear_, B 2031.

bāngeberg n. = bānbeorge

bāngebrec n. _fracture of a bone_, #An# 1439.

bānhelm m. _helmet, shield_? #Fin# 30 (v. also bārhelm).

bānhring † m. _vertebra, joint_.

bānhūs † n. _body, chest, breast_. bānhūses weard _the mind_, #Ex# 523.

bānlēas _boneless_, #Rd# 46^3.

bānloca † m. _joint, limb_.

+bann n. _proclamation, summons, command_, Æ, CP: _indiction (cycle of
15 years)_.

±bannan^7 _to summon, command, proclaim_. b. ūt _call out_, #Chr#.

bannend m. _summoner_, #Gl#.

+banngēar (-gēr) n. _indiction, year of the indiction_.

bannuc m. _a sort of cake_, OEG.

bānrift (y) n. _leggings, leg-armour, greaves_, #Gl#, WW (-rist).

bānsealf f. _salve for pain in the bones_, #Lcd# 138b.

bānsele ‡ m. _(bone-house), body_.

bānwærc m. _pain in the bones_, WW 200^12.

banweorc n. _homicide, murder_, LL 244, 32, 4#d#.

bānwyrt f. _violet_? _small knapweed_? #Lcd#.

bār (ǣ) m. ‘_boar_,’ _ÆGr_.

bara, bare wk. forms of bær, adj.

barda m. _beaked ship_, WW 289^12.

bārhelm m. _helmet with the image of a boar_? #Fin# 30 (v. also
bānhelm).

barian _to lay bare, uncover_: _depopulate_, W 310^5. [bær I.]

barice = bearrige

barm = bearm

barn I. pret. 3 sg. of biernan. II. = bearn

barrige = bearrige

bārspere n. _boar spear_.

bārsprēot m. _boar spear_.

barstlung = brastlung

barð m. _barque, ‘dromo,’_ WW 181^29.

barða = barda

baru napn. of bær adj.

basilisca m. _basilisk_, #PPs# 90^13.

basing m. _cloak_, Æ.

±bāsnian _to await, expect_.

bāsnung f. _expectation_ (N).

bastard m. _bastard_, #Chr# 1066#d#. [_OFr._]

basu (e, ea, eo) gsmn. baswes _purple, scarlet, crimson_. baswa stān
_topaz_.

basuhǣwen _purple_.

+baswian _to stain red_, ES 33·177.

bāt I. fm. _‘boat’, ship, vessel_, _Chr_. II. pret. 3 sg. of bītan.

batian _to batten, fatten_, CP 173^20: _heal_: _grow better_, Æ.

bātswegen m. _boatman_, EC 254.

batt _bat, cudgel, club_, OEG 18b18.

bātwā = būtū

bātweard m. _ship’s watchman_, B 1900.

bað = bæð

±baðian _to wash, lave, ‘bathe’_ (tr. and intr.), _give baths
(to others)_, _Lcd_; Æ, AO.

baðu v. bæð.

be- prefix. =1.= specializes the meaning of a tr. vb. (as in behōn,
besettan). =2.= makes an intr. vb. transitive (beswīcan, beðencan).
=3.= is privative (bedǣlan, belīðan). =4.= does not alter the meaning
(becuman).

be prep. w. d. and instr. (of place) _‘by,’ near, in, on, upon, with,
along, at, to_. be eallum _altogether_. be fullan _in full_: (of time)
_in, about, by, before, while, during_: _for, because of, in
consideration of, by, by means of, through, in conformity with, in
comparison with_: _about, concerning, in reference to_: _on penalty of_.
be āwihte _in any respect_. be fullan _in excess_. be sumum dǣle
_partly_. be ānfealdum _single_. be twīfealdum _two-fold_. be fullan
_fully, perfectly_. be ðām mǣstan _at the most_. be ðām (ðān) ðe
_because, as, according as, how_. be norðan, sūðan _to the north, south
of...._ be æftan = beæftan

bēacen (ē) n. _‘beacon,’ sign, token, phenomenon, portent, apparition_,
_JnL_ (ē): _standard, banner_, _B_.

bēacenfȳr n. _beacon fire, lighthouse_, OET 180^7 (ǣ).

bēacenstān m. _stone on which to light a beacon fire_, WW.

bēacn- = bīecn-, bīcn-

bead = bed

bēad I. pret. 3 sg. of bēodan. II. (NG) = bēod

beado == beadu

beadowig = bǣdewēg

beadu † f. gds. beaduwe, beadowe _war, battle, fighting, strife_.

beaducāf _bold in battle_, #Rd# 1^11.

beaducræft m. _skill in war_, #An# 219.

beaducræftig † _warlike_.

beaducwealm m. _violent death_, #An# 1704.

beadufolm f. _battle-hand_, B 990.

beadugrīma m. _war-mask, helmet_, B 2257.

beaduhrægl † n. _coat of mail_.

beadulāc † n. _war-play, battle_.

beadulēoma m. _(battle-light), sword_, B 1523.

beadumægen n. _battle strength, force_, #Ex# 329.

beadumēce m. _battle-sword_, B 1454.

beadurǣs m. _rush of battle_, #Ma# 111.

beadurinc † m. _warrior, soldier_.

beadurōf † _strong in battle, renowned in war_.

beadurūn f. _secret of a quarrel_, B 501.

beaduscearp _keen in battle (sword)_, B 2704.

beaduscrūd n. _coat of mail_, B 453; 2660?

beadusearo n. _war equipment_, #Ex# 572.

beaduserce f. _coat of mail_, B 2755.

beaduðrēat m. _war-band, army_, #El# 31.

beaduwǣpen † n. _weapon of war_.

beaduwang † m. _battlefield_.

beaduweorc † n. _work of battle, warlike operation_.

beaduwraǣd (o^2) m. _fighting company_, #Lcd# 125b.

beæftan I. adv. _after, hereafter, afterwards, behind_, _AO_; CP (bi-).
[‘_baft_’] II. prep. w. d. _after, behind_.

beǣwnian _to join in marriage, marry_, #Chr# 1052#d#. [ǣw]

beaftan _to lament_, _MtL_ 11^17. [= be-hafetian; ‘_beft_’]

bēag I. (ǣ, ē) m. _ring_ (as ornament or as money), _coil, bracelet,
collar, crown, garland_, _Æ_; CP. [‘_bee_’; būgan] II. pret. 3 sg. of
būgan.

bēag-gifa, -gyfa † m. _ring-giver, lord, king, generous chief_.

bēaggifu (bēah-) † f. _ring-giving_.

bēaghord (h) † n. _ring-hoard_.

bēaghroden † _diademed, adorned with rings or armlets_.

bēaghyrne (h) f. _corner of the eye_, WW 156^41.

bēagian (ē) _to crown_.

bēag-sel n., -sele † m. _hall in which rings are distributed_.

bēagðegu (h) f. _receiving of rings_, B 2176.

bēagwīse n. _round shape_, GD 343^15.

bēagwriða (h) m. _armlet_, B 2018.

bēah I. = bēag. II. pret. 3 sg. of būgan.

beāh- = bēag-

beāhsian _to ask advice_, #Bl# 199^29; 205^28.

bealanīð = bealunīð

bealcan, bealcettan _to ‘belch,’ utter, bring up, splutter out, give
forth, emit_, _Ps_; Æ: _come forth_.

beald (a) _‘bold,’ brave, confident, strong_, _Ps_; AO, CP: _impudent_.

bealde adv. _boldly, courageously, confidently_: _without hesitation,
immediately_.

bealdian _to be bold_, _B_ 2177. [‘_bold_’]

bealdlīce ‘_boldly_,’ _Jul_.

bealdnes (a) f. _boldness_.

bealdor † m. _lord, master, hero_.

bealdwyrde _bold of speech_, Æ.

beale- = bealu-

bealg, bealh pret. 3 sg. of belgan.

beallucas mp. ‘_testiculi_,’ _Gl_. [‘_ballock_’]

bealo = bealu

bealo- = bealu-

bealu I. † gs. b(e)al(u)wes n. _‘bale,’ harm, injury, destruction, ruin,
evil, mischief_, _Sat, Ps, Chr_: _wickedness, malice_: _a noxious
thing_, Æ. II. adj. _baleful, deadly, dangerous, wicked, evil_.

bealubend m. _pernicious bond_, W 178^2.

bealubenn f. _mortal wound_, #Ex# 238.

bealublonden _pernicious_, #GnE# 198.

bealuclomm mf. _oppressive bond_, #Hell# 65.

bealucræft m. _magic art_, #Met# 26^75.

bealucwealm m. _violent death_, B 2265.

bealudǣd † f. _evil deed, sin_.

bealuful _‘baleful,’ dire, wicked, cruel_, _Cr_.

bealufūs _prone to sin_, #Rim# 50.

bealu-hycgende ‡, -hȳdig ‡ _meditating mischief_.

bealuinwit n. _deceit, treachery_, #PPs# 54^24.

bealulēas † _harmless, innocent_, _Chr, Gn_. [‘_baleless_’]

bealunīð † m. _malice, wickedness_.

bealurāp m. _oppressive fetter_, #Cr# 365.

bealusearu n. _wicked machination_, #Jul# 473.

bealusīð † m. _hurt, adversity_: _death_.

bealusorg f. _dire sorrow_, #Ph# 409.

bealuspell n. _baleful message_, #Ex# 510.

bealuðonc m. _evil thought_, #Jul# 469.

bealuwes, bealwes v. bealu.

bēam I. m. _tree_, _KC, Rd_: _‘beam,’ rafter, piece of wood_, _Chr, Mt_;
CP, Mdf: _cross, gallows_, _Cr_: (†) _ship_, _Rd_: _column, pillar_:
_sunbeam_, _Chr, Ps_: _metal girder_, _AO_. II. (NG) = bȳme

bēamere (_Mt_) = bȳmere

bēamsceadu † f. _shade of a tree_.

bēamtelg ‡ m. _wood-dye, carbonaceous ink_.

bēamweg m. _road made with logs_, BC 1·417´.

bēamwer m. _wooden weir_? BC 2·242´.

bēan (īe) f. _‘bean,’ pea, legume_, _Lcd_; Mdf.

bēan-belgas, -coddas (_Lk_) mp. _bean-pods, husks or cods_. [v. ‘_cod_’]

bēancynn n. _a kind of bean_, WW 205^3.

bēanen adj. _of beans_, #Lcd# 1·282^9.

bēanlēag f. _land where beans grow_, _KC_ 5·265. [v. ‘_bean_’]

bēanmelu n. _bean meal_, #Lcd# 31b.

bēansǣd n. _bean seed_.

bēanscalu f. _bean-pod_, OEG 608.

bēar (NG) = bēor

bearce (æ) f. _barking_, #Gl#.

beard m. ‘_beard_,’ _VPs_; Æ.

+bearded _having a beard_, GD 279^14.

beardlēas _beardless, youthful_.

bearg I. m. _‘barrow’ pig, hog_, _Mt_ (e), _Rd_. II. pret. 3 sg. of
beorgan.

bearh = bearg I. and II.

bearht == beorht

bearhtm I. (br-, e, eo, y) m. _brightness, flash_: _twinkling (of an
eye)_, _instant_. II. == breahtm

bearhtme adv. _instantly_.

bearhtmhwæt _swift as the twinkling of an eye, momentary_, #Az#
107 (br-).

bearhtmhwīl f. _moment, twinkling of an eye, point of time_, GD.

bearm I. (a) m. _lap, bosom, breast_, _Lk_: _middle, inside_: (†)
_possession_. II. _emotion, excitement_? #PPs# 118. III. = beorma

bearmclāð n. _apron_.

bearmrægl n. _apron_. [hrægl]

bearmtēag _yeast-box_, LL 455[17].

bearn I. (a, eo) n. _child, son, descendant, offspring, issue_, _B, Mt,
TC_; AO, CP. lēoda b. _children of men_. [‘_bairn_’] II. = barn pret. 3
sg. of biernan. III. pret. 3 sg. of beiernan. IV. = bereærn

bearnan (N) = biernan

bearncennicge _mother_, DR.

bearn-ēaca (CP, Æ), -ēacen (CP), -eacnod, -ēacnigende (Æ) _pregnant_.

bearnende (NG) = biernende ptc. of biernan.

bearngebyrda fp. _child-bearing_, B 946.

bearngestrēon n. _procreation of children_, #Rd# 21^27.

bearnlēas _childless_, Æ.

bearnlēast (ē^2) f. _childlessness_.

bearnlufe _affection (for a child)_, _adoption_, BH 454^11.

bearn-myrðra m., -myrðre f. _murderer or murderess of a child_.

bearntēam m. _offspring, posterity_, _AO_: _procreation of children_,
HL. [‘_bairnteam_’]

bearo == bearu

bearrige f? ‘_braugina_,’ ‘_baruina_,’ #Gl#.

bears == bærs

bēarscipe = bēorscipe

±bearu gs. bearwes m. _grove, wood_, _BH_; CP; Mdf. [berwe]

bearug = bearg

bearunæs m. _woody shore_, #Rd# 58^5.

bearwe (æ) f. _basket, wheelbarrow_, LL 455^15.

bearwes v. bearu.

beasu = basu I.

+bēat n. _scourging_, Æ.

±bēatan^7 pret. bēot and (rarely) beoft (ES 38·28) _to ‘beat,’ strike,
thrust, dash_, _Bo, Bl, Ps_: _hurt, injure_, #Da# 265: _tramp, tread_,
_B_.

bēatere m. _beater, boxer_, Æ.

bēaw m. _gad-fly_, WW.

bebaðian _to bathe, wash_ (tr. intr. and refl.).

bebēodan^2 _to offer, commit, entrust_, CP: _bid, enjoin, instruct,
command, require_, _Æ, Lk_; AO, CP: _announce, proclaim_. [‘_bibede_’]

bebēodend m. _commander, master_, CP.

bebēodendlic _commanding, imperative_, #ÆGr#.

bebeorgan^3 _to be on one’s guard, defend, protect_, _B_. [‘_bibergh_’]

beber (WW 11^14) = befer

beberan^4 _to carry to, supply with_.

bebindan^3 _to bind about, bind fast_, Æ.

be-birgan, -birigan = bebyrgan

bebītan (bibī-) _to bite_, Cp 251#m#.

beblāwan _to blow upon_.

bebod n. _command, injunction, order, decree_, _Mt_; Æ, AO, CP. ðā
bebodu _the (ten) commandments_. [‘_bibod_’]

beboddæg m. _appointed day_, A 11·102^67.

bebodian wv. = bebēodan

bebodrǣden f. _command, authority_, #LPs# 118^110.

bebrǣdan _to spread, cover_, MH 44^19.

bebrecan^4 _to break to pieces_, #Sol# 295.

bebregdan^3 _to pretend_, LkL 20^20.

bebrūcan^2 _to practise_: _consume (food)_.

bebūgan^2 _to flow round, surround, enclose_: _turn from, shun, avoid_,
_El_: _reach, extend_. [‘_bibugh_’]

bebycgan (A) _to sell_.

bebycgung f. _selling_, WW.

bebyrdan _to fringe, border_, WW 375^41.

be-byrgan (AO) -byrian I. _to raise a mound to, bury, inter_, _Æ_.
[‘_bebury_’] II. = bebeorgan

be-byrgednes, -byrig(ed)nes f. _burial, burying_.

bebyrig- = bebyrg-

bebyrwan (?= -bȳwan, BT) _to rub over_, GD 318^3.

bec = bæc

bēc v. bōc.

becæfian _to ornament_, WW 137^22.

+bēcan _to make over in writing, grant by charter_, EC 202´.

becc = bæc II.

becca m. _pick, mattock_, _WW_; Æ. [‘_beck_’; and v. Indog.
Forschungen 24]

beccen m. _buyer_, WW (#KGl#) 75^36. [= bycgend]

bece m. = bæc II.

bēce (oe) f. _‘beech’ (tree)_, _Gl_. (v. also bōc.)

becēapian^1 _to sell_, Æ: _buy_, Æ.

becefed = becæfed, pp. of becæfian.

bēcen I. _‘beechen,’ made of beechwood_, _Lcd, WW_. II. (NG) = bēacen

beceorfan^3 _to cut, cut off, separate_, Æ. hēafde b. _to behead_.

beceorian _to murmur at, complain of_.

becēowan^2 _to gnaw in pieces_, #Soul# 111.

becēpan I. _to take notice of_, #LPs#. II. = becȳpan

beceð pres. 3 sg. of bacan.

becīdan _to complain of_, ÆH 2·470^6.

becierran (e, y) _to turn, turn round, pass by, avoid_, _Met_; CP:
_wind, twist_: _pervert_, _Chr_: _give up, betray_. [‘_bicharre_’]

beclǣman _to plaster over, poultice_, #Lcd#.

beclǣnsian _to cleanse_, #SPs# 18^14.

beclemman _to bind, enclose_, #Sol# 71.

beclencan _to hold fast_, #LPs# 104^18.

beclēsung = beclȳsung

beclingan^3 _enclose, bind_, #El# 696.

beclipð (CP) = beclypð pres. 3 sg. of beclyppan.

beclīsung = beclȳsung

beclypian (eo) _to accuse, challenge, sue at law_, _LL_. [‘_beclepe_’]

beclyppan _to clasp, embrace, encompass, hold_, Æ.

beclypping f. _embrace_, OEG.

beclȳsan _to close, shut up, enclose, confine, imprison_, Æ. [clūse]
  [[under “clūs”]]

beclȳsung f. _enclosure, cell_, OEG 1522: _period, syllogism_, OEG.

bēcn == bēac(e)n

becnāwan^7 _to know_, RB.

becnedan^5 _to knead up_, #Lcd# 93a.

bēcnydlic = bȳcnendlic  [[redirected to “bīcnendlic”]]

becnyttan _to knit, tie, bind_, Æ, CP.

becol-a? m., -e? f. _spectre_, WW 530^33.

bēcrǣding = bōcrǣding

becrēopan^2 _to creep into, crawl_, AO: _be hidden_, Æ.

becst pres. 2 sg. of bacan.

bēctrēow = bōctrēow

becuman^4 _to happen, befall_, Æ: _come, approach, arrive, enter, meet
with, fall in with_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP: _happen, befall_, _Bo, Æ_:
(impers.) _befit_, MkL 14^31. [‘_become_’]

bēcun (NG) = bēacan  [[under “bīcnan”]]

becwelan^4 _to die_, LL 400 (1).

becweðan^5 _to say_: _speak to, address, exhort, admonish, blame_, _Ps_:
_‘bequeath,’ leave by will_, _KC_; Æ.

becweðere m. _interpreter, translator_, EHy 16 (proem.).

becwyddod _bespoken, deposited_, WW 115^39.

becwylman? _to torment_ (BT).

becyme m. _event, result_, BH 372^19.

becȳpan _to sell_.

becyrran = becierran

±bed I. n. _prayer, supplication_, Æ, CP: _religious ordinance,
service_, Æ. II. = bedd. III. = bæd pret. 3 sg. of biddan.

bedǣlan _to deprive, strip, bereave of, rob_, _Æ_: _release, free from_.
[‘_bedeal_’]

bēdan = bēodan

+bēdan = +bædan

bedbǣr (ē) f. _portable bed_, NG.

+bedbigen f. _payment for prayers_, LL 258 (51). [bycgan]

bedbolster m. _bolster, pillow_, WW 124^20.

bedbūr n. _bed-chamber_, #HGl# 481.

±bedcleofa (e, i, y) m. _bedroom, chamber_: _lair_, #Ps#.

bed-cofa m., -cofe f. _bedchamber_.

bedd n. _‘bed,’ couch, resting-place_, _Jn, KC_; CP: _garden-bed, plot_,
#Lcd#; Mdf.

+bedda f. _consort, wife_, _B_. [‘_i-bedde_’]

±beddagas mpl. _rogation days_.

beddclāð m. _bed-covering_; pl. _bed-clothes_.

beddclyfa = bedcleofa

beddgemāna m. _cohabitation_, CP 99^25.

beddian _to make a ‘bed,’_ _WW_: _provide one with a bed_, _LL_.

bedding f. _‘bedding,’ bed-covering_, _LPs, WW_; Æ: _bed_.

beddrēaf = bedrēaf

beddreda (i, y) = bedreda

beddrest † f. _bed_.

beddstōw f. _bed_, BH 410^12.

be-dēaglian (-dēahl) = bedīglian

bedecian _to beg_, Æ, CP.

bedēglian = bedīglian

bedēlan = bedǣlan

bedelfan^3 _to dig round_, _Lk_: _bury_, _Rood_; AO. [‘_bedelve_’]

bedelfung f. _digging round_, WW 149^11.

beden pp. of biddan.

bedēpan (#VPs#) = bedīpan

bedeppan = bedyppan

bedfelt mn. _bed-covering_, RB 91^16.

bedgerid n. _(ant’s) nest_, #Lcd# 118a.

+bedgiht f. _evening_, WW 117^8.

±bedhūs n. _chapel, oratory_, Æ.

+bedian _to pray, worship_, BH 408^29.

bedīcian _to surround with a dyke, embank, fortify_, #Chr# 1016#e#.

bedidrian = bedydrian

bedīeglan = bedīglian

be-dīglian (-dīhl-; ēa, ē, īe) _to conceal, hide, obscure, keep secret_,
Æ: _be concealed, lie hid_.

bedīgling f. _secret place_, #RPs# 80^8.

beding = bedding

bedīolan (K) = bedīeglan

bedīpan (ē, ȳ) _to dip, immerse_: _anoint_, #CPs# 140^5.

+bedmann m. _worshipper, priest_.

bedōn _to shut_, _PPs_ 147^2. [‘_bedo_’]

bedol = bedul

±bedrǣden f. _prayer, intercession_, Æ.

bedragan v. pp. bedrōg.

bedrēaf n. _bed-clothes, bedding_, Æ.

bedreda (i, y) m. (and adj.) _‘bedridden’ (man)_, _Æ_.

bedrēf = bedrēaf

bedrēosan^2 _to overcome, deceive_? #Gen# 528, 823: _deprive of,
bereave, despoil_.

bedrest = beddrest

bedrida = bedreda

bedrīfan^1 _to drive, beat, strike, assail_, AO: _follow up, pursue_:
_surround, cover_.

bedrincan^3 _to drink up, absorb_, #Lcd#.

bedrīp n. _compulsory service rendered to a landowner at harvest time_,
_LL_. [‘_bedrip_’]

bedrōg _beguiled_, #Gen# 602.

bedrūgian _to dry up_, #Lcd# 1·336^4.

bedryda = bedreda

bedrȳpan _to moisten_, GPH 391^18.

+bedscipe † m. _cohabitation, wedlock_.

+bedstōw f. _place of prayer, oratory_.

bedstrēaw n. _straw for bedding_, ÆL 31^572.

bedtīd f. _bed-time_, WW 176^2.

+bedtīd _time of prayer_, MH 126^18.

bed-ðegn, -ðen, m. _chamber-servant, chamberlain_, WW.

bedu f. _asking, prayer_, CP. [_Goth._ bida]

bedūfan^2 _immerse, submerge, drown_, _Æ_. [‘_bedove_’]

bedul _suppliant_, WW 180^12.

bedwāhrift n. _bed-curtain_, Ct.

bedydrian _to conceal from_, Æ: _deceive_, Æ.

bedȳfan _to immerse_, GD 73^24; #CPs# 68^16.

bedȳglan = bedīeglan

bedȳpan = bedīpan

be-dyppan (e), _to dip, immerse_, _Æ, Mt_. [‘_bedip_’]

bedyrnan _to conceal_. [dierne]

beēastan _to the east of_, AO, #Chr#.

beēastannorðan _to the north-east of_, AO.

beebbian _to leave aground by the ebb tide, strand_, #Chr# 897#a#.

beefesian _to cut off the hair_, ÆL 33^84.

beerf- = beyrf-

befædman = befæðman

befǣlon pret. 3 pl. of befēolan.

befæstan _to fasten, fix, ground, establish, make safe, put in safe
keeping_, Æ, CP: _apply, utilize_: _commend, entrust to_, Æ, CP.

befæstnian (ea) _to fix_, Æ: _pledge, betroth_.

befættian _to fatten, anoint_, #LPs# 140^5.

befæðman, -mian _to encircle_, Æ.

befaran^6 _to go, go round or among, traverse, encompass, surround_, AO:
_come upon, surprise, catch_, LL 230, 13, 1.

befealdan^7 _to fold, roll up, envelop, clasp, surround, involve,
cover_, Æ, CP: _attach_.

befeallan I. (sv^7) _to fall_, _Mt, CP_; Æ: _deprive of, bereave of_:
_fall to, be assigned to_: ‘_befall_,’ #ÆGr#. II. = befyllan

befeastnian (NG) = befæstan

befēgan _to join_, ÆL 23^425.

befelgan = befylgan

befellan = befyllan

befelðrǣd = hefeldðrǣd (#HGl# 489)

befeohtan^3 _to take by fighting_, _Rd_ 4^32. [‘_befight_’]

befēolan^3 _to put away, bury_: _deliver, grant, consign, entrust to_,
_Ps_: _betake oneself to, apply oneself, devote oneself to, persist,
persevere_, CP: _importune_: _put up with, be pleased with_.
[‘_bifele_’]

befeolhan = befēolan

befēon _to deprive of property_, OEG 3157.

befer (eo, y) m. ‘_beaver_,’ _ÆGr_ (eo); Mdf.

befēran _to surround_, Æ: _come upon, overtake, pass by_: _go about_:
_fall among_, NG.

befician _to deceive_, LL (320^24).

befīlan = befȳlan

befilgan = befylgan

befiod (#HGl# 480) pp. of befēon.

beflēan^6 _to peel, skin, flay_, _WW_. beflagen flǣsc _entrails_.
[‘_beflay_’]

beflēogan^2 _to fly upon_, _BH_. [‘_befly_’]

beflēon^2 (w. a.) _to flee from, flee, escape, avoid_, _Ps_; CP.
[‘_beflee_’]

beflōwan^7 _to flow round, over_, _Wif_. [‘_beflow_’]

befōn^7 _to surround, clasp, include, envelop, encase, clothe_, _Bl_; Æ,
AO, CP: _comprehend, seize, attach (at law)_, _lay hold of, catch,
ensnare_, _Gen_: _contain, receive, conceive_: _explain_, CP. wordum b.
_tell, relate_. on b. _have to do with, engage in_. [‘_befong_’]

befor = befer

beforan I. prep. α. (w. d.) (local) _‘before,’ in front of, in the
presence of_: (temporal) _before, prior to, sooner than_. β. (w. a.)
_before_. II. adv. (local) _before, in front_: (temporal) _before,
formerly, in former times, earlier, sooner_: _at hand, openly_.

beforhtian _to dread_, Æ 23b^525.

befōtian _to cut off one’s feet_, Æ 25^117.

befrēogan _to free, liberate_, #Ps#.

be-frīnan, -frignan^3 _to question, ask, learn_, Æ.

befrīnung f. _inquiry, investigation_, OEG 2309.

befrȳnan = befrīnan

beftan = beæftan

befullan _entirely, completely, perfectly_, CP 5^20.

befȳlan (ī) _to befoul, defile_, _Lcd_; Æ. [‘_befile_’]

befylgan _to follow after, pursue, persevere with_, #Lcd#.

befyllan I. _to fell, lay low, strike down_: (†) _take by killing,
bereave, rob_. [feallan] II. _to fill up_. [full]

bēg = bēag

bēga gmfn. of bēgen.

begalan^6 _to sing incantations over, enchant_, _Lcd_; Æ. [‘_bigale_’]

begān _to go over, traverse_, _Æ_: _get to, come by, fall into_: _go to,
visit, care for, cultivate_, AO: _occupy_, _Æ, BH, Lcd_: _surround_,
_Chr_. ūtan b. _besiege_: _practise, do, engage in, perform, attend to,
be diligent about_, Æ, CP: _honour, serve, worship_: _profess_. on
borh b. _pledge oneself_, CP. [‘_bego_’]

bēgan = bīegan

begang m. †_way, course, circuit, extent_: _district, region_:
_business, undertaking, practice, exercise, service, reverence,
worship_: _cultivation_, GD. [= bīgeng]

beganga = bīgenga

begangan = begān

begangol (bigeong-) m.? _cultivator_, LkR: _worship_, DR.

be-gānnes, -gangnes f. _‘calendæ,’ celebration_.

begbēam m. _bramble, thorn-bush_.

bēge = bēgen

bēgea = bēga

bēgean = bīegan

begēat I. m. _attainment_, Æ: _acquisitions, property_, Æ. II. pret. 3
sg. of begēotan.

begēm- = begīm-

begēmen (#KGl#) = begīmen

bēgen nm. (but where one thing is m. and the other f. or n., the nom. is
bā, bū), nf. bā, nn. bū; gmfn. bēg(e)a, bēgra; dimfn. bǣm, bām; am. bū;
af. bā; an. bū _both_. v. also būtū. [‘_bo_’]

begenga = bīgenga

begēomerian _to lament_, W 75^15.

begeondan (AO, CP), begeonde, -geonan, prep. w. a. d.; and adv.
_‘beyond,’ on the other side_, _Æ, Chr, Jn_.

begeotan = begietan

begēotan^2 _to pour over or upon, anoint, infuse, flood (with)_,
_sprinkle, cover with fluid_, _Chr_; Æ. [‘_bigeten_’; _Ger._ begiessen]

beger n. _berry_, #Gl#.

beget = begeat pret. 3 sg. of begietan.

begeten pp. of (1) begēotan, (2) begietan.

bēgian = bēagian

begiellan^3 _to sing, celebrate_, #Seaf# 24.

begietan^5 (e, i, y) _to get, find, acquire, attain, receive, take,
seize_, AO, CP: _happen_: _beget_.

begietend (e) m. _one who gets_, WW 214^25.

begīman (ȳ) _to look after, take care of_: _do service, attend_: _take
heed, observe_.

begīmen f. _attention, observation_.

begīming f. _invention, device_: _observance_: _care, regard_, OEG (ȳ).

begīnan^1 _to open the mouth wide, swallow_.

beginnan^3 _to ‘begin,’_ _Æ_; AO, CP: _attempt, undertake_, Æ:
_attack_, AO.

begir = beger

begirdan = begyrdan

begitan (AO, CP) = begietan

begleddian _to befoul, pollute_, Æ: _stain, dye_, Æ.

beglīdan^1 _to leave, desert_, #PPs# 56^1.

begnagan^6 _to gnaw_.

begneorð? _attentive_, BH 370^2 (?= *becneord, BT).

begnīdan^1 _to rub thoroughly_, #Lcd# 50a.

begnornian _to mourn for_, B 3179.

begong = begang

bēgra gmfn. of bēgen.

begrǣtan = begrētan

begrafan^5 _to bury_, _El_ 835. [‘_begrave_’]

begrētan _to lament_, #PPs# 77^63.

begrindan^3 † _to grind, polish, sharpen_: _deprive of, rob_.

begrīpan^1 _to grip, seize_: _chide_, _Ps_. [‘_begripe_’]

begriwen ptc. _steeped in_, Æ.

begroren _overwhelmed_, #Sat# 52.

begrornian = begnornian

begrynian _to ensnare, entrap_. [grīn]

begȳm- = begīm-

begyrdan _to gird, clothe_, Æ: _surround, fortify_, CP.

begytan = begietan

bēh = bēag, bēah

behabban _to include, hold, surround, comprehend, contain_, AO, CP:
_detain, withhold_.

behādian _to unfrock (a priest)_, LL.

behæfednes f. _restraint, temperance_.

behæpsian _to fasten a door_, ÆL 31^214.

behǣs f. _promise, vow_, #Chr# 1093. [v. ‘_behest_’]

behættian _to scalp_, Æ: _make bald_.

behaldan = behealdan

behamelian _to mutilate, hamstring_, Æ: _strip naked_?

behammen _‘clavatus,’ (of shoe) patched_ (BT), _studded with nails_
(Napier), GD 37^13.

behāt n. _promise, vow_, Æ: _threat_.

behātan^7 (often w. d. pers.) _to promise, vow, pledge oneself_, _Æ_;
CP: _threaten_. [‘_behight_’]

behātland n. _promised land_, GD 204^12.

behāwian _to see clearly, take care, consider_, _Mt_. [‘_bihowe_’]

behēafdian _to ‘behead,’_ _Mt_; Æ, AO.

behēafdung f. _beheading_, Æ.

behēafodlic _capital (punishment)_, OEG 4042.

behealdan^7 _to hold, have, occupy, possess, guard, preserve_, _KC_; CP:
_contain_: _keep, observe, consider_, _Bl, Ps_; AO, CP: _to ‘behold,’
look at, gaze on, observe, see_, _Gen_; Æ, CP: _signify_, Æ: _avail,
effect_: _take care, beware, be cautious_, CP: _act, behave_.

behealdend m. _beholder, spectator_, BH 26^23.

behealdennes f. _observance_, DR: _continence_, DR.

behealdnes f. _regard, observation_, Æ.

behēawan^7 _to cut, chip, chop, beat_, CP: _cut off from, deprive of_.

behēdan (#KGl#) = behȳdan

be-hēfe, -hēf(e)lic _suitable, proper, necessary_, Æ.

behēfnes f. _convenience, utility_.

behelan^4 _to cover over, hide_.

beheldan = behealdan

behelian _to cover over, conceal, bury_, CP.

behelmian _to cover over_, #Sol# 104.

behēofian _to lament_.

be-heonan, -heonon prep. (w. d.) and adv. _on this side of, close by_.

be-hēot, -hēt, pret. 3 sg. of behātan.

behicgan = behycgan

behīdan = behȳdan

behīdiglīce = behȳdiglīce

behienan (#Chr#) = beheonan

behildan _to depart_, #EPs# 138^19.

behindan I. prep. (w. d., a.), adv. _‘behind,’ after_, _Chr_,
_etc._; CP.

be-hinon, -hionan = beheonan

behīring = behȳrung

behīwian _to dissimulate_, RBL 16^7.

behlæmman = behlemman

behlǣnan _to surround_.

behlāf f. _remainder_, Æ. [= *belāf]

behlēapan^7 _to leap upon, settle on, fix upon, devote oneself to_, CP.

behlehhan = behlyhhan

behlemman † _to dash together_.

behlīdan^1 _to close, cover over_, Æ, AO.

behliden = beliden, pp. of belīðan.

behlyhhan^6 (e) † _to deride, exult over_, _Gu_. [‘_bilaugh_’]

behlȳðan _to rob, deprive of_, #Rd# 15^10.

behōf n. _behoof, profit_: _need, want_, OEG 27^34.

behōfian (abs. and w. g.) _to have need of, require, want_, _BH, Lcd_;
CP, Æ: (impers.) _it behoves, concerns, belongs, is needful or
necessary_, _MtL, Jn_. [‘_behove_’]

behōflic _necessary_, _MkL_. [‘_behovely_’]

behogadnes f. _practice_, WW 427^37.

behogian _to care for_, _RB_. [‘_bihogien_’]

behogod _careful, prudent_, DR. adv. -līce.

behōn^7 _to hang round_, _CP_. [‘_behung_’]

behorsian _to deprive of horses_, #Chr#.

behrēosan^2 _to fall_: _cover, shelter_. behroren pp. _divested of_.

behrēowsian _to rue, repent of, make amends_, _Æ_: _compassionate_, Æ.
[‘_bireusy_’]

behrēowsung f. _repentance, penitence_, _Æ_. [‘_bireusing_’]

behrēowsungtīd f. _time of repentance_, _Septuagesima_, Æ.

behrīman _to cover with hoarfrost_, #Wif# 48.

behringan _to surround_, CP.

behrōpan^7 _to plague, importune_, Lk 18^5.

behrūmian _to besmirch_, WW.

behrūmig _sooty_, MH 52^27.

bēhð f. _witness, sign_, #Jud# 174.

behwearf I. (eo) pret. 3 sg. of behweorfan. II. (#EPs#) = behwearft

behwearft m. _exchange_, #LPs# 43^13.

behweolfan (A) = behwylfan

behweorfan^3 _to turn, change, spread about_: _see to, arrange, prepare,
treat_, Æ: _bury_, Æ.

behwerfan = behwirfan

behwirfan (e, y) _to turn, change, convert_, CP: _exchange_: _prepare,
instruct, exercise_.

behwon _whence_, BH.

behwylfan _to cover, vault over_, #Ex# 426.

behwyrfan (Æ) = behwirfan

behycgan _to consider, bear in mind_: _confide, trust_ (on).

behȳdan (ī) _to conceal, shelter_, _Mt_; Æ. [‘_behide_’]

be-hȳdednes, -hȳdnes f. _concealment, secret place_.

behȳdig _careful, watchful, anxious_, Æ. adv. -hȳdiglīce, -hȳdelīce.

behȳdignes f. _solicitude, care, anxiety_. [hygdig] v. MP 1·393.

behygd- = behȳd-

behyhtan _to trust_, W 48^8.

behyldan _to flay, skin_, AO.

behylian _to cover, veil_, ÆL 33^237.

behȳpan (ē) _to surround_, BH 188^14. [hȳpe]

behȳpian _to hang up_, OEG 3322.

behȳran _to let on hire_, WW.

behȳrung f. _letting, loan_, WW.

behȳðelīce _sumptuously_, WW 513^6.

beiernan^3 (i, y) _to run up to, over, or into, incur_: _occur to_.

beigbēam = begbēam

beinnan = binnan

beinsiglian _to seal up_, RHy 6^34.

beirnan = beiernan

beiundane = begeondan

belācan^7 _to inclose_, #Rd# 61^7.

belādian _to excuse, clear_, Æ, AO, CP.

belādiendlic _apologetic, that can be excused_, OEG.

belādigend m. _apologist_, WW 332^2.

belādung f. _apology, excuse_, WW.

belǣdan _to lead astray_, _RB_. [‘_belead_’]

belǣfan _to leave, spare_: _be left, remain, survive_, _Ps_; Æ.
[‘_beleave_’]

belændan = belandian

belǣðan _to make hateful, pervert_, W 47^7.

be-lǣwa (Æ), -lǣwend, m. _betrayer_.

belǣwan _to betray_, Æ.

belǣwung f. _betrayal, treachery_, Æ.

belāf I. pret. 3 sg. of belīfan. II. v. behlāf.

belandian _to deprive of lands_, #Chr#.

belcedswēora adj. _having an inflated neck_, #Rd# 79^1. [bælc]

belcentan, belcettan = bealcettan  [[under “bealcan”]]

beld, beldo = bieldo

+beldan I. _to cover, bind (a book)_? JnL p188^3. II. = +bieldan

belēan^6 _to censure, reprove_: _charge with_: _dissuade, forbid,
prevent_, CP.

belē- (NG) = belǣ-

belecgan _to cover, invest, surround, afflict_, _An_; AO: _attribute to,
charge with, accuse_. [‘_belay_’]

belēfan = belȳfan

belendan = belandian

belene f. _henbane_.

belēogan^2 _to deceive by lying_, _GD_: (impers.) _be mistaken_.
[‘_belie_’]

beleoran (A) _to pass by, pass over_.

beleorendlic _past_, DR.

belēosan^2 † _to be deprived of, lose_.

belēweda (LL 438^5) = belǣwend  [[under “belǣwa”]]

belewit = bilewit

belflȳs n. _bell-wether’s fleece_, LL 451 (14).

belg (æ, i, y) m. _bag, purse, leathern bottle, pair of bellows, pod,
husk_. [v. ‘_belly_’]

+belg m. _anger_: _arrogance_, RB 69^20.

belgan^3 (intr., refl.) _to be or become angry_, CP, Æ: (+) _offend,
provoke_.

belgnes f. _injustice_, MtL 20^13 (bælig-).

+belh = +belg

belhring m. _bell-ringing_, RB.

belhūs = bellhūs

belibban _to deprive of life_.

belicgan^5 _to lie round, surround, hedge in, encompass_, Æ, AO.

belīfan^1 _to remain over, be left_, _Æ_; AO. [‘_belive_’]

belīfend m. _survivor_, OEG.

belīfian = belibban

belig = belg

belīman _to glue together_, #Sc# 96^19.

belimp n. _event, occurrence, affair_.

belimpan^3 _to concern, regard, belong to, conduce to_, _Bo_; CP:
_happen_, _B_; Æ: _become_: (impers.) _befit_. [‘_belimp_’]

be-lisnian, -listnian _to castrate_, Æ. belisnod, -listnod pp. as sbm.
_eunuch_. wæs b. ‘_stupratur_,’ #HGl# 507.

belīðan^1 † _to deprive of_. pp. beliden _departed, dead_, #An# 1087.

bell = belle

bellan^3 _to bellow, bark, grunt, roar_, _Rd_. [‘_bell_’]

belle f. ‘_bell_,’ _KC_; Æ, CP.

bellhūs n. _‘bell-house,’ belfry_, _LL, WW_.

belltācen n. _indication (sounding of the hour) by a bell_, HL 11^65.

belltīd f. _a canonical hour marked by the ringing of a bell_.
(cp. belltācen)

belōcian ‘_intendere_,’ #RPs# 44^5.

belone = belene

belt m. _‘belt,’ girdle_, _WW_.

belūcan^2 _to lock, shut up, close, surround, enclose, embody_, _Bl, CP,
Mt, VPs_; AO: _stop, impede, block up, choke_, Æ: _preserve, protect_:
_shut out, exclude_, Æ. [‘_belouke_’]

belune = belene

belūtian _to lie hid_, GD 293^15.

belȳfan (ē) _to believe_, Æ. pp. belȳfed _having belief_.

belympan = belimpan

belyrtan (N) _to deceive, cheat_, _MtL_ 2^16. [‘_belirt_’]

belytegian _to allure, seduce_, AO 112^26. [lytig]

bemǣnan _to ‘bemoan,’ bewail, mourn over, lament_, _Æ_.

bemancian _to maim_, #Lcd# 3·214^20.

bēmare = bȳmere

bēme = bīeme

bemeldian _to disclose, reveal, denounce_.

bēmere = bȳmere

bemetan^5 _to estimate, account, consider_, _AO_. [‘_bemete_’]

bemīðan^1 _to hide, conceal_, CP: _lie hid_.

be-murcian, -murcnian, _to murmur at, grumble over_, AO 48^17.

bemurnan^3 (also wk.) _to mourn, bewail, deplore, be sorry for_: _care
for, take heed for_.

bemūtian _to change, exchange for_, #Gu# 42. [_L._ mutare]

bemyldan _to bury_, WW. [molde]

ben = benn

bēn I. f. (±) _prayer, request_, _Lk_; AO, CP: _compulsory service_, LL
447 (v. 2·418, Fron.). [‘_bene_’] II. pret. 3 sg. of bannan.

bēna m., bēne f. _suitor, petitioner_, AO.

benacian _to lay bare_. [nacod]

benǣman (ē) _to take away, deprive of, rob of_, Æ, AO. [niman]

benc f. ‘_bench_,’ _B_.

bencian _to make benches_, LL 455 (13).

bencsittend † m. _one who sits on a bench_.

bencswēg ‡ m. _bench-rejoicing, sound of revelry_, B 1161.

bencðel † n. _bench-board, wainscotted space where benches stand_, _B_.
[v. ‘_theal_’]

bend mfn. (+b. MtL) _bond, chain, fetter_, _BH, Bl, Mt, Ps_; CP: _band,
ribbon, ornament, chaplet, crown_, _WW_. [‘_bend_’]

bēndagas mpl. _days of prayer_, ‘_dies rogationum_,’ A 8·329^26.

±bendan _to bend (a bow)_, _Ps_: _bind, fetter_, _Chr_. [‘_bend_’]

bendfeorm = bēnfeorm

beneah (pret. pres. vb.) pl. benugon, pret. benohte _to have at one’s
disposal, possess, enjoy_: _require_.

beneced = benacod pp. of benacian.

benēman = benǣman

benemnan _to name_: _stipulate, settle, declare, asseverate_.

benēotan^2 † _to deprive of, rob_.

beneoðan (i, y) prep. w. d. _‘beneath,’ under, below_.

bēnfeorm f. _harvest feast_? _bean-feast_? _food required from a
tenant_? (BT), LL 452´.

bengeat n. _wound-gash_, B 1121.

benīdan _to compel_? A 9·110.

beniman^4 _to take, assume, obtain_, AO: _take away from, deprive of,
bereave, rob_, _BH, Bo, Gen_; AO, CP: _contain_: _catch, apprehend_.
[‘_benim_’]

beniming f. _deprival_, WW (bi-).

beniðan = beneoðan

bēnlic (oe) _that may be entreated_, DR. adv. -līce _beseechingly_, DR.

benn † f. _wound, mortal injury_. [bana]

bēnn pret. 3 sg. of bannan.

benne f. _reed-grass_, BC (Mdf).

±bennian † _to wound_.

benohte v. beneah.

benorðan _in the north, northwards (of)_.

benoten pp. of benēotan.

benotian _to use, consume_, _ChrB_. [‘_benote_’]

bēnrīp n. _compulsory service rendered to a landowner at harvest time_,
LL 448. [cp. bedrīp]

±bēnsian _to pray, supplicate_, BH.

benst pres. 2 sg. of bannan.

bēntīd f. _prayer time, rogation days_, #Men# 75.

bēntigðe, bēntīð(ig)e _granting requests, gracious_, #LPs#: _obtaining
requests, successful_, #Chr#.

benð pres. 3 sg. of bannan.

benugon v. beneah.

bēnyrð f. _ploughing required from a tenant_, LL 448 (5,2).

benyðan = beneoðan

bēo I. f. nap. bēon; dp. bēo(u)m ‘_bee_,’ _Ps_; Æ. II. pres. 1 sg. of
bēon.

bēobrēad n. _honey with the comb_.

bēoce = bēce

bēoceorl m. _bee-master, bee-keeper_, LL 448[5].

bēocere m. _bee-keeper_, LL. [_MHG._ bīkar]

+beod = +bed

bēod m. _table_, _Mt_: _bowl, dish_. [‘_beod_’]

bēodærn n. _refectory, dining-room_, Æ (-ern). on bēoderne _at table_.

beodan = bidon pret. pl. of bīdan.

±bēodan^2 _to command, decree, summon_, Æ, AO, CP. b. ūt _call out
(an army)_, _banish_: _declare, inform, announce, proclaim_, _Gu, LL_:
_threaten_: _offer, proffer, give, grant, surrender_, _Æ, Gen_; AO:
(refl.) _show oneself, behave_: _exact, collect_. [‘_bid_,’ ‘_i-bede_’]

bēodbolle f. _table-bowl_, #Gl#.

bēodclāð m. _‘gausape,’ table-cloth, carpet_, #ÆGr# 34^8.

bēoddern = bēodærn

bēoddian _to do joiner’s work_, LL 455 (13).

bēodend m. _preceptor_, CM 967.

bēodendlic = bebēodendlic

bēodern (Æ) = bēodærn

bēodfæt n. _table-vessel, cup_, WW 204^25.

bēodfers n. _grace at meal-time_.

bēodgæst m. _table-companion_, #An# 1090.

bēodgenēat † m. _table-companion_.

bēodgereordu np. _feast_, #Gen# 1518.

bēod(h)rægl n. _table-cloth_, WW 126^33.

bēodlāfa fp. _table-leavings_, #Bl# 53^13.

bēodland n. _land from which the table of monasteries, etc., was
supplied, glebe-land_, Ct.

bēodlēs f. _table-allowance_, TC 474^6.

bēodrēaf n. _table-cloth_, TC 530^36.

bēod-scēat n., -scȳte m. _table-napkin, towel_, WW 449^22.

bēodwyst f. _a table with food on it_, #LPs# 22^5. [wist]

beofer = beofor

beofian = bifian

beofor (e, y) m. _beaver_.

beoft redupl. pret. of bēatan; beoftadon is from a later wk. *beoftian
(ES 38·28).

beofung = bifung

bēogang m. _swarm of bees_, WW.

+bēogol (ȳ) _submissive, obedient_: _forgiving_, Æ. [būgan]

bēohāta m. _chief_? _prince_? #Ex# 253?

beolone = belene

bēom I. dp. of bēo I. II. = bēam. III. = bēo pres. 1 sg. of bēon.

bēomōder f. _queen-bee_, OEG.

bēon I. anv. [conj. in full (WS and A) Wt 548] _to be, exist, become,
happen_. b. ymbe _to have to do with_. b. of _to be gone_. (v. also eom,
wesan.) II. nap. of bēo I.

bēona gp. of bēo I.

bēonbrēad = bēobrēad

bēonbroð n. _mead_? (or? bēanbroð ES 38·302).

bēonnon pret. pl. of bannan.

bēor n. _strong drink_, _‘beer,’ mead_, _Lk_ (v. A 27·495). [bēow]

+bēor m. _pot-companion, guest_, Æ.

beora = bearu

±beoran = beran

bēorbyden f. _beer-barrel_, LL 455 (17).

beorc I. (e, i, y) f. _birch_, Mdf: _name of the rune for =b=_. II. (±)
n. _barking_.

beorcan^3 (tr.) _to ‘bark,’_ _CP_: (intr.) _bark at_, _Lcd_.

beorce = beorc

beorcen (i, y) _of birch_.

beorcragu (e^1) f. _lichen from a birch-tree_, #Lcd# 99b.

beorcrind (e^1) f. _birch-bark_, #Lcd# 119b.

beord (BH 392^27) = bord

bēordræst(e) f. _dregs of beer_, #Lcd#.

beorg m. _mountain, hill_, _Lk, AO_; Mdf: _mound, tumulus_, _‘barrow,’
burial place_, _Æ, Lcd_.

+beorg n. _protection, defence, refuge_, W.

beorgælfen f. _orcad_.

±beorgan I. sv^3 (w. d.) _to save, deliver, preserve, guard, defend,
fortify, spare_, _An, Ps_; AO, CP: (w. refl. d.) _beware of, avoid,
guard against_. [‘_bergh_’] II. = byrgan II.

beorg-hlið n. nap. -hleoðu _mountain-height, mountain-slope_.

+beorglic _fitting, profitable_, LL, W: _safe, prudent_, Æ.

beorgseðel n. _mountain dwelling_. [setl]

beorgstede m. _mound_.

±beorh I. == beorg. II. imperat. of beorgan.

beorhlēode (WW 178^41) = burglēode

+beorhnes f. _refuge_, #CPs# 30^3.

+beorhstōw f. _place of refuge_, #PPs# 31^8.

beorht (e, y) I. _‘bright,’ shining, brilliant, light, clear_, _Bo, El,
Gu_: _clear-sounding, loud_, _Cra_: _excellent, distinguished,
remarkable, beautiful, magnificent, noble, glorious_, _PPs_: _pure,
sublime, holy, divine_. II. n. _brightness, gleam, light_. ēagan b.
_twinkling of an eye_: _sight_.

beorhtan = bierhtan

beorhtblōwende _bright-blooming_, #Lcd# 1·404^9.

beorhte _brightly, brilliantly, splendidly_: _clearly, lucidly,
distinctly_, CP.

beorhthwīl (OEG) = bearhtmhwīl

beorhtian _to glisten, shine_, _BH, Ps_: _to sound clearly_, _B_: _to
make bright_, _VPs_. [‘_bright_’]

+beorhtian = +beorhtnian

beorhtlic _brilliant, clear, shining, splendid_. adv. -līce, _Mk_; Æ.
[‘_brightly_’]

beorhtm = bearhtm

beorhtnes f. _‘brightness,’ clearness, splendour, beauty_, _JnL,
Lk_; CP.

±beorhtnian (e) _to grow bright_, OEG 534: _glorify_.

beorhtrodor m. _shining heavens_, #Ex# 94.

beorhtte (= *beorgihte) pl. _mountainous_, AO 10^25.

beorhtu = bierhtu

beorhtword (y^1) _clear-voiced_, #Sat# 238.

bēorhyrde m. _cellarer, butler_, #Cra# 75.

beorm- = bearm-

beorma m. _‘barm,’ yeast, leaven_, _Mt_.

+beormad _leavened_, MtR 13^33.

beorn I. † m. _man_: _noble, hero, chief, prince, warrior_, _B, Ma_:
_rich man_, #Run# 12. [‘_berne_’] II. = barn pret. 3 sg. of biernan.
III. = bearn

beornan (#VPs#) = biernan

beorncyning m. _lord of heroes_, B 2148.

beorne = byrne

Beornice mp. _Bernicians_, _inhabitants of part of Northumbria_.

beorning (= ie) f. _incense_, LkL 1^11.

beornðrēat m. _troop of men_, #Pa# 50.

beornwiga m. †_warrior, hero_.

bēorscealc _reveller, feaster_, B 1240.

±bēorscipe, m. _feast, banquet, revel_, Æ, CP.

bēorsele † m. _beer-hall, banqueting hall_.

bēorsetl n. _ale-bench_, #Jul# 687.

beorswinig (NG) = bærsynnig

bēorðegu † f. _beer-drinking_.

beorð fn? _birth_: _the thing born_.  [[from first edition]]

-beorðling (ie) v. hyse-b.  [[headword spelled “hyseberðling”]]

±beorðor (e, o, u, y) n. _child-bearing, child-birth_: _what is born,
foetus, offspring_.

beorðorcwelm m. _abortion_, WW 348^23.

beoruh = beorg

beosmrian = bismrian  [[redirected to “bismerian”]]

bēost m. _beestings, the first milk of a cow after calving_, _WW_:
_swelling (of the ground)_? v. Mdf. [‘_beest_’]

beosu = basu

±bēot I. n. _boastful speech, boast, threat_, _Æ, Gen_. on b.
_boastfully_: _promise, vow_, AO: _command_: _peril, danger_, #Da# 265.
[= behāt; ‘_beot_,’ ‘_i-beot_’] II. pret. 3 sg. of bēatan.

beotian = botian

±bēotian _to threaten_, _Jul_: _boast, vow, promise_, AO. [‘_beoten_’]

±bēotlic _arrogant, exulting, boastful, threatening_, Æ. adv. -līce.

bēotmæcg m. _leader_, #Da# 265.

bēoton pret. pl. of bēatan.

bēotung f. _threatening_.

bēotword † n. _boast_: _threat_.

bēoðēof m. _bee-thief_, LL 54[9,2].

bēoum dp. of bēo.

bēow n. _barley_, #Gl#.

bēowan = bȳwan

bēowyrt f. _bee-wort, sweet flag_, #Lcd#.

bepǣcan _to deceive, cheat, seduce_, _Mt_; Æ. [‘_bipeche_’]

bepǣcend m. _deceiver_, Æ.

bepǣcestre f. _whore_, #ÆGr# 175^9.

bepǣcung f. _deception_, OEG.

beprīwan (ē) _to wink_, #Bo#, W.

bēr (NG) = bǣr

bera m. ‘_bear_,’ _Æ_.

beræccan = bereccan

berǣdan _to deprive, take by treachery, rob_: _betray_, Æ: _deliberate
on_: _get the better of_.

berǣsan _to rush upon or into_, Æ, CP.

±beran (eo) _to ‘bear,’ carry, bring, take away, carry out, extend_,
_B_; Æ, AO, CP: _bring forth, produce_, _Bl, Mt, Gen_ (and
v. ‘_ibere_’). berende _fruitful_. +boren _born, own (by birth)_:
(with ūp) _set forth, open (a case)_, #Chr# 1052#e#: _wear_, _AO_:
_endure, support, sustain_, _LL, Mt_; CP.

berascin n. _bear-skin_, EC 250.

+berbed _vermiculated_, DR 4^3.

ber-bēne, -bīne f. _verbena_, #Lcd#.

berc == beorc

+berd- = +byrd-

+bēre = +bǣre

bere m. _barley_, _JnLR_; Æ. [‘_bear_’]

bereærn n. ‘_barn_,’ _LkL_. [bere, ærn]

berēafere m. _despoiler_, OEG 46^36.

berēafian _to ‘bereave,’ deprive of, take away, seize, rob, despoil_,
_Bo_; Æ, AO.

berēafigend m. _despoiler, robber_.

berebrytta m. _barn-keeper_, LL 451 (17).

berēcan _to cause to smoke, smoke_ (tr.), #Lcd# 1·106^16.

bereccan _to relate_: _excuse or justify oneself_, CP.

berecorn n. _barley-corn_.

+bered _crushed_, WW: _harassed, oppressed_, NG.

berēfian (#KGl#) = berēafian

bereflōr m. _barn-floor, threshing-floor_, _LkL_. [v. ‘_bear_’]

beregafol n. _rent paid in barley_, LL 116 (59^1). [cp. gafolbære]

beregræs n. _barley-grass, fodder_, WW 148^26.

berehalm n. _barley haulm, straw_, #Lcd# 157a.

bereland (ber-) _barley land_, KC 3·367^9.

beren I. _of barley_, Æ. II. = biren. III. = bereærn

berend m. _bearer, carrier_, #Gl#.

berendan _to peel, take off husk_, #Lcd#.

berende v. beran.

berendlīce _with fecundity_, DR 32^8.

berendnes f. _fertility_, DR 108^11.

berenhulu f. _barley-husk_, #Sc# 95^19.

berēnian _to bring about_, #Ex# 147: _ornament, mount (with silver)_, KC
6·101^22.

berēocan^2 _to fumigate_, LL (164^5).

berēofan^2 † _to bereave, deprive, rob of_.

berēotan^2 _to bewail_, #Hell# 6.

berēowsian = behrēowsian

-berere v. wæter-b.  [[under “wæterberend”]]

berern (NG) = bereærn

beresǣd n. _barley_, BH 366^27.

beretūn m. _barley-inclosure, threshing-floor, barn_, _MtL_; Æ.
[‘_barton_’]

berewæstm m. _barley-crop_, #Lcd# 1·402^6.

berewīc f. _barley-yard, demesne farm_, _TC_. [‘_berewick_’]

berg = (1) bearg, (2) beorg

berg- = beri-, byrg-

berh = bearh pret. 3 sg. of beorgan.

berht = beorht

berht- = beorht-, bierht-

berhtm- = breahtm-

berian I. _to make bare, clear_, B 1239. [bær] II. = byrgan II.

+berian = +byrian

bericge = bearrige

berīdan^1 _to ride round, surround, besiege_, _LL_: _overtake, seize,
capture, occupy_, #Chr#. [‘_beride_’]

berie f. ‘_berry_,’ _Lcd_: _grape_, _Æ_.

berig I. n. _berry_, #RPs# 77^47. II. = byrig, ds. of burg.

berigdrenc m. _drink made of mulberries_, WW 114^22.

berige = berie

berigea = byrga

be-rindan, -rindran _to strip off bark, peel_.

berinnan^3 _to run upon, run over, wet, bedew_, _Cr_ 1176. [‘_berun_’]

berland = bereland

bern = bereærn

bern- = bærn-, biern-

bernan (#VPs#) = bærnan

bernhus n. _barn_, GD 68^22. [= beren-]

berōfon (pret. pl. of *berafan or *berebban) _despoiled_, #Gen# 2078.

berōwan^7 _to row round_, #Chr# 897#a#.

berst = byrst

+berst n. _bursting, eruption_, W 186^7.

±berstan^3 intr. (tr. at #Rd# 2^8) _to break_, _‘burst,’ fail, fall_,
_B, Lcd, Ma_; Æ, AO: _break away from, escape_: _break to pieces, crash,
resound_.

berthwīl = beorhthwīl

bertūn = beretūn

berð- = beorð-, byrð-

+bēru = +bǣru

berūmod = behrūmod, pp. of behrūmian.

berunnen pp. of berinnan.

berwe ds. of bearu.

berwinde f. _‘bearbind,’ navel-wort_, WW 300^19.

berȳfan _to deprive_, #Mod# 63. [rēaf]

berȳpan _despoil of, strip, spoil, plunder, rob_, Æ.

besǣgan _to sink_, GPH 388^85.

besæncan = besencan

besǣtian _to lay wait for_, AO 146^11.

besārgian _to lament, bewail, be sorry for, pity_, Æ. [sārig]

besārgung f. _compassion_, Æ.

  [[Entry before author’s corrections:
  besārgung f. _sorrowing_, VHy: _compassion_, Æ.]]

besāwan^7 _to sow_, Æ.

bescēad (bi-) n. _distinction_.

bescēadan^7 _to separate, discriminate_: _scatter, sprinkle over_, #Lcd#
20b.

besceadian (_Sol_ 339) = besceaduwian

besceaduwian, _to overshadow_, #RPs# 139^8. [‘_beshade_’]

besceafan^6 _to scrape thoroughly_, #Lcd# 143b.

bescēan pret. 3 sg. of bescīnan.

besceatwyrpan ‘_despondi_,’ v. OEG 1^4555; 2^346; ES 42·170.

bescēawere m. _observer_, DHy 24^15

bescēawian _to look round upon, survey, contemplate, consider, watch_,
Æ, AO: _look to, care for_. bescēawod _cautious, careful_, #Lcd#
3·436^11.

besceawiendlic _contemplative_, OEG 991.

bescēawodnes f. _vision, sight_.

bescēawung f. _contemplation_.

besceddan = besceadan  [[headword spelled “bescēadan”]]

bescencan _to give to drink_, #Gu# 596.

besceofan = bescūfan

besceoren (WW 217^24) = bescoren pp. of bescieran.

bescēotan^2 _to shoot into, plunge into, implant_: _happen, occur_, AO.

be-sceran, -scerwan = bescieran

bescerian = bescierian

bescieran^4 _to shear, shave, cut hair, give the tonsure_, _Æ, AO_.
[‘_beshear_’]

bescierednes (y^2) f. _deprivation_, WW 351^13.

bescierian _to separate from, deprive of_, #Chr#: _defraud_.

bescīnan^1 _to shine upon, light up, illuminate_, _Rd_; Æ. [‘_beshine_’]

besciran = bescieran

bescirian = bescierian

bescītan^1 _to befoul_, WW 507^28.

bescrēadian _to scrape off, clean off_, ES 42·171.

bescrepan^5 _to scrape_, #Lcd# 101a.

bescūfan^2 _to shove, impel, thrust down, hurl, throw_, Æ, AO:
_force_, Æ.

bescȳlan _to look askance_, #Bo# 121^30. [sceol]

bescyr- = bescier-

besēcan _to beseech, beg urgently_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

besecgan _to announce, introduce_: _defend, excuse oneself_: (w. on)
_accuse_, Æ.

beselian = besylian

besellan _to surround, cover (over)_: _hand over_.

besema = besma

besencan _to cause to sink, submerge, immerse, drown_, _Bl, Mt_; AO, CP:
_plunge into (fire)_, GD 317. [‘_besench_’]

besendan _to send_, Æ.

besengan _to singe, burn_, AO.

besēon I. sv^5 (tr., intr. and refl.) _to see, look, look round,
behold_, _Æ, Mk, Ps_; AO: _look after, go to see, visit_: _provide for_.
b. tō _look upon, have regard to_, CP. [‘_besee_’] II. sv^1 _to
suffuse_, #Cr# 1088.

besēoðan _to boil down_, #Lcd#.

besēowian (ī, ȳ) _to sew together, sew up_, _Ep_. [‘_besew_’]

be-serian, -serwan = besierwan

besettan _to put, place, set near, appoint_, Æ: _own, keep, occupy_:
_‘beset,’ cover, surround with, adorn_, _B_; CP, Æ: _besiege, invest_,
_An_: _institute, set going_.

besīdian _to regulate the size of anything_, RB 89^18. [sīd]

besierwan _to ensnare, surprise, deceive, defraud, oppress_, AO. [searu]

besīgan (on) _to rush_, v. OEG 4126.

besilfran _to silver_, #VPs# 67^14.

besincan^3 (intr.) _to sink_, _AO_. [‘_besink_’]

besingan^3 _to sing of, bewail_: _sing charms, enchant_, Æ.

besirwan (AO, CP) = besierwan

besittan^5 _to sit round, surround, beset, besiege_, _Chr_; AO: _hold
council_: _occupy, possess_. [‘_besit_’]

besīwian = besēowian

beslǣpan^7 _to sleep_, LL (284^3).

beslēan^6 _to strike, beat, cut off, take away, deprive by violence_, Æ.

beslēpan _to slip on, cover, impose, put on, clothe_.

beslītan^1 † _to slit, tear_.

besma m. _‘besom,’ broom, rod_, _AO, Mt_.

besmēagan _to consider about, inquire into_, ÆL 23b^633.

+bēsmed _curved_, WW 515^9. [bōsm]

bēsming f. _curve, curvature_, WW. [bōsm]

besmirwan _to ‘besmear,’_ WW.

besmītan^1 _to soil, defile, pollute, dishonour_, _Bl_; Æ, CP.
[‘_besmit_’]

besmitenes f. _soil, stain, defilement, degradation, dirtiness_, Æ.

besmittian _to defile_.

besmiðian _to work (in metal)_, _forge, surround with forged work_.

besmocian _to smoke, envelop with incense_, ANS 84·3.

besmyred = besmirwed pp. of besmirwan.

besnǣdan † _to cut, mutilate_.

besnīwian _to cover with snow_, _WW_. [‘_besnow_’]

be-snyðian, -snyððan † _to rob, deprive of_.

besolcen _stupefied, dull, sluggish, inactive, slow_, CP.

besorg _dear, beloved_, Æ.

besorgian _to regret_: _be anxious about, dread, shrink from_, Æ.

besorh = besorg

bespǣtan _to spit upon_, ÆH 2·248^24.

bespanan^6 _to lead astray, entice, incite, urge, persuade_, AO.

besparrian _to bar, shut_, #Gl#.

bespirian = bespyrigan

besprecan^5 _to speak about_, _AO_: _speak against, accuse of_, _Ps_:
_claim at law_, _LL_: _complain_. [‘_bespeak_’]

besprengan _to besprinkle_, _Lcd_. [‘_bespreng_’]

bespyrigan _to track, trace_, LL.

best adv. (used as superl. of wel) _best, most_.

besta, beste wk. forms of superl. adj. betst.

bestǣlan (ē) _to lay a charge against, convict_.

bestæppan^6 _to tread upon, step, go, enter_, Æ.

bestandan^6 _to stand round or about, beset, surround_, _Æ_: _attend
to_, Æ: _beset, harass_, _Jn_. [‘_bestand_’]

bestealcian _to move stealthily, steal, ‘stalk,’_ ÆL 32^40. [stealc]

bestefnod ptc. _provided with a fringe_, WW 375^41.

bestelan^4 _to move stealthily, steal away, steal upon_, _AO, LL_; Æ,
CP: (†) _deprive_. [‘_besteal_’]

bestēlan = bestǣlan

bestēman = bestȳman

bestēpan (= i) _to deprive of (children)_, GD 76^18.

bestingan^3 _to thrust in, push_, Æ.

bestrēdan _to bestrew, cover_, BH 154^27 (#b#).

bestrēowian _to ‘bestrew,’ besprinkle_, _Æ_.

bestreððan _to bestrew, cover over_.

bestrīcan^1 _to make a stroke_, #Lcd# 186b. [strīca]
  [[headword spelled “strica”]]

bestrīdan^1 _to ‘bestride,’ mount_, _Æ_.

bestrīpan _to strip, plunder, despoil_.

bestrūdan^7 _to spoil, plunder, rob_.

bestrȳpan = bestrīpan

bestryððan = bestreððan

bestuddian _to be careful for, trouble about_, #Kl# 14^6.

bestȳman (e) _to bedew, wet, flood_, B 486. [stēam]

bestyrian _to heap up_, _BH_. [‘_bestir_’]

bestyrman _to agitate_, #Bo# 9^11.

besu = basu

besūpan^2 _to sup up, swallow_, #Lcd# 113b.

besūtian _to besmirch_, GPH 403^26.

besūðan = be sūðan

beswǣlan _to burn, singe, scorch_, Æ.

beswǣpan = beswāpan

beswǣtan _to sweat, toil_, #Sc# 111^14.

beswāpan^7 _to clothe, cover over, veil, protect_, CP: _persuade_, _BH_.
[‘_beswape_’]

beswelgan _to swallow up_, #EPs# 106^27; 123^3.

beswemman _to make to bathe_, #Bo# 115^8.

beswencan _to afflict_, #CPs# 68^18.

besweðian _to swathe, wrap up, wind round_.

beswic n. _treachery, deceit_, AO (bī-), CP: _snare_.

beswica (bī-) m. _deceiver_.

beswican^1 _to deceive, seduce, betray, circumvent, frustrate_, _Bl,
Mt_; AO, CP: _to overcome, supplant_, AO. [‘_beswike_’]

beswīcend m. _deceiver, seducer_, #Gl#.

beswicenes f. _deception_: _surrender_.

beswicfalle f. _trap_, #Gl#.

beswician _to escape, be free from_, BH.

beswicol _deceitful_, CP 238^16. (bi-)

beswīcung f. _deception_, WW.

beswincan^3 _to toil, exert oneself, make with toil_, _Jn_: _till,
plough_, Æ. beswuncen _exhausted, tired out_. [‘_beswink_’]

beswingan^3 _to flog, scourge, beat, strike_, _Æ_; CP. [‘_beswinge_’]

beswylian _to drench, flood_, #Rood# 23. [swilian]

besyftan _to sprinkle_, ÆL 23^165. [siftan]

besylfran = besilfran

besylian _to sully, defile, stain_, Æ.

besyr-ewian, -i(a)n = besierwan

bet adv. _better_, #Bo#. [‘_bet_’]

-bēta v. dǣd-b.

betācnian _to ‘betoken,’ designate_.

betǣcan (w. d.) _to make over, give up to, impart, deliver, entrust,
commend to_, _Æ, Lk_; AO, CP: _appoint (for)_, _set apart as, dedicate_:
_show, point out_, _Lk_: _give orders_, RB 130^4: _pursue, hunt_, WW
92^28. [‘_beteach_’]

±bētan _to amend, repair, restore, cure_, CP: _make good, make amends,
remedy, compensate, atone, pay_ ‘bōt’ _for an offence_, _Æ, Mt, Lcd_;
AO, CP: _attend to (fire or light)_, _AO_. ðurst b. _quench thirst_.
[bōt; ‘_beet_’ vb.]

betast = betst

betboren _of higher birth_, LL.

bēte f. _‘beet,’ beetroot_, _Lcd_. [_L._ beta]

-bēte v. twi-b.

bētel = (1) bīetl; (2) bītol  [[second reference ambiguous]]

beteldan^3 † _to cover, hem in, surround_: _overload, oppress_.

betellan _to speak about, answer, defend oneself (against a charge)_,
_exculpate oneself_, _Chr_; Æ.

bētend m. _restorer_, #Ruin# 28.

+bētendnes f. _amendment_, OEG 58^6.

betēon^1,2 _to cover, surround, enclose_, _AO_; Æ, CP: _dispose of,
bestow, bequeath_: _impeach, accuse_. [‘_betee_’]

betera ‘_better_,’ _AO, Mk_. followed by g. = _better in respect of...._

-bētere v. dǣd-b.  [[under “dǣdbēta”]]

±beterian _to ‘better,’ improve_, _CP_: _trim (lamp)_, GD.

beterring f. _improvement_, Æ.

betest = betst

betiēnan = betȳnan

betihtlian _to accuse_, LL.

betillan = betyllan

betimbran _to construct, build_, _B_. [‘_betimber_’]

betīnan = betȳnan

bēting = bǣtung

bētl = bīetl

betlic † _grand, excellent_.

bētnes f. _reparation, atonement_, LL (264^16).

betoce = betonice

betogenes f. _accusation_, LL.

betolden pp. of beteldan.

betonice f. ‘_betony_,’ _Lcd_.

betost = betst

betr- = beter-

betræppan = betreppan

betredan^5 _to tread upon, cover_, #CPs# 138^10.

betrendan _to roll_, ES 37·180.

betreppan _to entrap, catch_, _Chr_. [‘_betrap_’]

be-trymman, -trymian _to enclose, surround, besiege_.

betst I. superl. adj. _‘best,’ first_, _AO, Chr, Cr_; CP. as sb.
_people of position_, _WW, Chr_. II. adv. _in the best manner, most_.

betstboren _best-born, eldest_.

bett == bet

be-tuh, -tuoxn (CP), -tux = betwux

betuldon pret. pl. of beteldan.

+bētung f. _repair, maintenance_, LL.

betwēnan = betwēonan

betweoh, betweohs = betwux

betwēonan, betwēonum I. prep. w. g. d. a. _between, among, amid, in the
midst_, _Ps, Bl_. II. adv. ‘_between_,’ _BH_: _in the meantime,
meanwhile_: _in turn, by turns_, CM (-twȳn-).

betweox, betweoxn, betwih(s) = betwux

betwīn- = betwēon-

betwīnforlētnes f. _intermission_, DR.

betwux (Æ, AO, CP) betwuht, betwix, betwux(t), betwisc prep. w. d. a.
_between, among, amongst, amidst, during_. b. ðisum _meanwhile_. b. ðǣm
ðe _whilst_. [‘_betwixt_’]

betwuxālegednes f. _interjection_, #ÆGr# 278^2.

betwuxāworpennes f. _interjection_, #ÆGr# 10^20.

betwuxblinnes (twih) f. _intermission_, DR 12^3.

betwuxfæc (yx) _internal_, OEG 3861.

betwuxgangan^7 (twih) _to go between_, #VPs# 28^7.

betwuxgangende (twih) _separating_.

betwuxgesett _interposed_.

betwuxlicgan^5 (twih) _to lie between_, BH 72^10.

betwuxsendan _to send between_.

betwuxt, -twyh, -twyx(t) = betwux

betȳhtlian = betīhtlian  [[headword spelled “betihtlian”]]

betyllan _to allure, decoy_, BH 358^4.

betȳnan (ī, īe) _to hedge in, enclose, shut, bury_, AO, CP: _end_, BH.
[tūn]

betȳnung f. _conclusion_, OEG 3210.

betyran _to pitch, stain a dark colour_. [teoru]

betyrnan _to turn round_: _prostrate oneself_, RB.

beð I. = bið pres. 3 sg. of bēon. II. = bæð

beðæncan = beðencan

beðan = beðian

beðearfende _needy, indigent_, #KGl# 708.

beðearflic _profitable_, ÆL 23b^242.

beðearfod _needy_, ES 8·474^50.

beðeccan _to cover, protect, cover over, conceal_.

beðen = beðung

beðencan _to consider, remember, take thought for, take care of, care
for_, _Gu_: (refl.) _reflect_, _‘bethink’ oneself_, _Lk_; Æ: _trust,
confide in, entrust to_, AO.

be-ðenian, -ðennan _to cover, stretch on or upon, spread over_.

beðēodan _to be joined (to)_, _adhere (to)_, RB 134^20.

beðerscan _to winnow, thrash_, #PPs# 43^7.

beðettan _to bathe_, #Lcd# 3·90^15 (A 30·397).

±beðian _to heat, warm, foment_, _Lcd_; Æ: _cherish_. [‘_beath_’]

beðrāwan^7 _to twist_, GPH 391^16.

beðridian _to circumvent, overcome, force_, AO.

beðringan^3 † _to encircle, encompass_: _beset, oppress, burden_.

beðryccan _to press down_, #Cr# 1446.

beðrydian, beðryððan = beðridian

beðrȳn _to press_, NC 273.

beðuncan (#Rd# 49^7) = beðencan

beðung f. _bathing, bath, fomentation, cataplasm_, _Lcd_; CP, Æ.
[‘_beathing_’; bæð]

be-ðurfan swv. pres., 3 sg. -ðearf, pl. -ðurfon, pret. -ðorfte. (w. g.
or a.) _to need, have need of, want_, Æ, CP.

beððan = beðian

beðwēan^6 _to moisten, wet_, #LPs# 6^7.

beðwyrian _to deprave_, WW 386^7. [ðweorh]

beðȳn _to thrust_, AO 158^6.

beufan = bufan

beūtan = būtan

bewacian _to watch, guard_, Æ.

bewadan^6 _to emerge_, #Rd# 88^24.

bewǣfan _to enfold, wrap round, cover over, clothe_, Æ, CP.

bewǣgan _to deceive, frustrate_, #BVPs#.

bewægnan _to offer, proffer_, B 1193.

bewǣlan _to oppress, afflict_, #An# 1363.

bewǣpnian _to disarm_, Æ.

bewærlan _to pass by_: _be free from_, DR.

bewarenian _to guard against, be on one’s guard_, CP.

bewarian _to keep watch, guard, preserve, ward off_, CP.

bewarnian = bewarenian

bewāwan^7 _to blow upon_, #Wa# 76. (biwāune = biwāwene)

beweallan^7 _to boil away_, #Lcd#.

bewealwian _to wallow_, #Bo# 115^9.

beweardian _to guard, protect_: _observe closely_.

beweaxan^7 _to grow over, cover over, surround_, Æ.

beweddendlic _relating to marriage_, OEG 1122.

beweddian _to betroth, marry_, Æ: _give security_. [‘_bewed_’]

beweddung f. _betrothal_, LL 442Ha.

bewefan^5 _to cover over_, #Lcd# 3·146^4.

bewegan^5 _to cover_.

bewēled (ȳ^2) _poisoned, polluted_, ES 38^344. [wōl]

bewellan _to knead, mix together_.

bewendan _to turn, turn round_, _Æ_; (refl.) _Mt_ 9^22: _turn one’s
attention, convert_, Æ. [‘_bewend_’]

bewenian † _to entertain, take care of, attend upon_.

beweorcan = bewyrcan

beweorpan^3 _to cast, cast down, plunge, throw_, Æ, AO: _beat_, Æ:
_surround_.

beweorðian _to adorn_, DD 118.

beweotian = bewitian

bewēpan^7 _to weep over, mourn, bewail_, _Æ_; AO. [‘_beweep_’]

bewēpendlic _lamentable_.

bewēpnian = bewǣpnian

bewerenes f. _prohibition_, BH 86^13.

bewerian _to guard, protect, defend_, Æ, AO: _check, prevent,
forbid_, Æ.

bewerigend m. _protector_, Æ.

bewerung f. _defence, fortification_.

bewestan prep. w. d. or adv. _to the west of_, _Chr_. [‘_bewest_’]

bewīcian _to encamp_, #Chr# 894#w#.

bewindan^3 _to wind round, clasp, entwine, envelop, encircle, surround_,
_B, Mt_; AO, CP: _brandish (a sword)_. hēafe b. _bewail_: _turn, wind,
revolve_.

bewindla (bi-) m. _hedge, border_, BC (Mdf).

bewitan swv., pres. 3 sg. -wāt, pret. 3 sg. -wiste _to keep, care for,
watch over, superintend, administer, lead, guide_, Æ, AO.

bewitian (eo) _to observe, attend to, care for, administer_: _perform_.

bewlātian _to look at, behold_, #LPs# 32^14.

bewlītan^1 _to look round_, #Gen# 29^25.

bewōpen (pp. of bewēpan) _lamented_: _tearful, weeping_.

bewrecan^5 † _to drive_: _drive away, banish_: _drive round, beat
round_.

bewrencan _to deceive_.

bewrēon^1,2 _to cover, hide, cover over, enwrap, protect, clothe_, _Sol,
Met_; CP. [‘_bewry_’]

bewreðian _to sustain, support_, #Rd# 81^21.

bewrītan^1 _to record_? #Creat# 19: _score round_.

bewrīðan^1 † _to bind, wind about, surround, envelop_.

bewrixl-an, -ian _to change_: _exchange, sell_, #PPs#.

bewuna adj. indecl. _accustomed, wont_, AO.

bewyddian = beweddian

bewȳled = bewēled

bewyllan (= ie) _to boil away_, #Lcd#.

bewylwian _to roll down, roll together_.

bewȳpð = bewēpð pres. 3 sg. of bewēpan.

bewyrcan _to work, construct, surround with, enclose, cover_, _B_; AO,
Æ: _work in, insert, adorn_, _Lcd_. [‘_bework_’]

bewyrpan = beweorpan

beyrfeweardian _to disinherit_, A 13·321.

beyrnan = beiernan

bezera = bæzere

bi, bī (1) = be (prep.); (2) f. = bēo

bi- v. also be-

bīad = bēod

biblioðēce f. biblioðeoco (AO) bibliðeca m. _library_: _bible_, _Æ_.
[‘_bibliotheca_’ (_L._)]

bībrēad = bēobrēad

bicce, bice f. ‘_bitch_,’ _Lcd, WW_.

biccen = byccen

bicgan (Æ) = bycgan

bicge = bicce

±bīcn-an, -ian (ē, ēa, īe, ȳ) _to make a sign_, _‘beckon,’ wink, nod_,
_Lk_; CP: _signify_: _summon_. [bēacn]  [[error for “bēacen”?]]

+bīcnend (ē), ±bicni(g)end m. _indicator, discloser_: _forefinger_.

bīcnendlic, +bīcni(g)endlic _allegorical_; (gram.) _indicative_, #ÆGr#
124^14.

bīcnol _indicating, indicative_, GPH 398^193.

±bīcnung (ēa, ē) f. _beckoning, nodding_: _token, symbol, figure_, Æ:
_figurative speech_.

bīcwide m. _byword, proverb, fable, tale_, _Æ_. [‘_bequeath_’]

bīd n. _lingering, hesitation, delay, halt_, _Rd_. [‘_bide_’]

±bīdan^1 (intr.) _to stay, continue, live, remain, delay_, _AO, Ps_:
(tr. usu. w. g.) _wait for, await, expect_, _Bl, Mt_; AO, CP: _endure,
experience, find_: _attain, obtain_. [‘_bide_’]

biddan^5 _to ask, entreat, pray, beseech_, _AO, Bl_. b. and bēodan,
hālsian _to beg and pray_: _order, command, require_, AO, CP. [‘_bid_’]

+biddan^5 (often refl.) _to beg, ask, pray_, _Bl, Mt_; Æ, CP: _worship_,
Æ, AO. [‘_i-bid_’]

biddere m. _petitioner_.

bidenfæt = bydenfæt

biderīp = bedrīp

bideð (CP) pres. 3 sg. of biddan.

bīdfæst † _firm, forced to stand out_.

bīding f. _abiding place, abode_, #Gu# 180.

bīdsteall † m. _halt, stand_.

bīe = bēo pres. 1 sg. of bēon.

bīecn = bēacen

bīecn- = bīcn-

bīegan (ē, ī, ȳ) _to bend, turn, turn back, incline_, _Bo, Mk_:
_depress, abase, humiliate_: _subject_: _persuade, convert_: +bȳged
_bowed down, infirm_, #Nic# 471^29. [‘_bey_,’ būgan]

bieldan (æ, e, i, y) _to encourage, excite, impel, exhort, confirm_,
_CP, Ma_; Æ, AO. [‘_bield_’; beald]

bieldo (y^2) f. _boldness, courage, arrogance, confidence_, _BH_; CP.
[‘_bield_’]

bielg = belg

bielw- = bilew-

bīeme (ē, i, ȳ) f. _trumpet_, _CP, WW_: _tablet, billet_. [‘_beme_’]

bīen = bēan

bīencoddas = bēancoddas  [[under “bēanbelgas”]]

+bierde = +byrde

+bierhtan (e, y) _to brighten, be or make bright, illuminate,
enlighten_, CP: _make clear_: _celebrate_. [beorht]

bierhtu (e, eo, i, y) f. _brightness, effulgence, brilliance_, CP.
[beorht]

bierm = bearm

biernan^3 (ea, eo, i, y) _to ‘burn,’ be on fire, give light_, _Æ, Lk,
Ex, VPs_.

biersteð, bierst pres. 3 sg. of berstan.

bierð pres. 3 sg. of beran.

biesen = bisen

biesgian = bysgian  [[redirected to “bisgian”]]

bieter- = biter-

bīetl (ē, ī, ȳ) m. _‘beetle,’ mallet, hammer_, _CP, Jud_ (y).

bietr- = biter-

bīeð = bēoð pres. pl. of bēon.

bīfēran _to feed_, ES 41^324.

bifian _to tremble, be moved, shake, quake_, _Bo, Ps_; Æ. [‘_bive_’]

bifigendlic (byfg-) _terrible_, NC 274.

bifung f. _trembling, shaking_, Æ.

-bifung (eo^1) v. eorð-b.  [[under “eorðbeofung”]]

bīfylce n. _neighbouring people_. [folc]

big = be

big- = be-, bī-, bycg-

bīg- = bīeg-

bige = byge

+bīgednes f. _inflection, declension, case_, #ÆGr#.

bīgegnes = bīgengnes

bīgels m. _arch, vault_, Æ: _inclination_.

+bīgendlic _inflectional_, #ÆGr# 91^8.

+bīgendnes = +bīgednes

bīgeng f. _practice, exercise, observance, worship_, _Æ_: _cultivation_,
Æ. [‘_bigeng_’]

bīgenga m. _inhabitant_: _cultivator_, Æ: _worshipper_, Æ: _benefactor_.

bīgenge n. _practice, worship_.

bīgengere m. _worker_: _worshipper_.

bīgengestre f. _handmaiden, attendant, worshipper_, #Gl#.

bīgengnes, f. _application, study_.

+bigeð = +bygeð pres. 3 sg. of +bycgan.

bīging f. _bending_, WW 216^38.

bigleaf- (eo, i) = bīleof-

bīgnes f. _power of bending, bending_. [bīegan]

+bīgnes (ȳ) f. _frequented place, assembly_? #EPs# 117^27.

+bigð = +bigeð

bīgyrdel m. _girdle, belt, purse_, _Æ, Mt_: _treasury_. [‘_bygirdle_’]

bigytan = begietan

bihianda (_MtL_ 5^27) = behindan

bīhst = bȳhst pres. 2 sg. of būgan.

+bihð f. _abode_? #Gu# 346. [cp. byht]

bil = bill

bilcettan = bealcettan  [[under “bealcan”]]

bildan = bieldan

+bilde _bold, brave_, Æ. [beald]

bile m. _‘bill,’ beak, trunk (of an elephant)_, _WW_: _prow_.

bīle = bȳle

bīlefa = bīleofa

bilehwīt == bilewit

bīleofa (i^2) m., bīleofen f. _support, sustenance, food, nourishment_,
_Æ, WW_: _money, pay_. [‘_bylive_’; libban]

bilēofian _to support, feed upon_, #Guth# 34^7.

bilewet == bilewit

bilewit _innocent, pure, simple, sincere, honest_, _BH, Mt_; Æ, CP:
_calm, gentle, merciful, gracious_: _plausible_. [‘_bilewhit_’], adv.
-līce.

bilewitnes f. _mildness, simplicity, innocence, purity_, Æ, CP.

bilgesleht = billgesliht

bilgst, bilhst pres. 2 sg. of belgan.

bilgð pres. 3 sg. of belgan.

bilherge = billere

bīlibb-, bīlif- = bīleof-

bilig = belg

biliw- = bilew-

bill n. _‘bill,’ chopper, battle-axe, falchion, sword_, _B, WW_.

billere m. _‘bibulta’ (plant)_, WW.

billgesliht n. _clashing of swords, battle_, †#Chr# 937.

billhete m. _murderous hate, strife_, #An# 78.

+bilod _having a bill or beak_. [bile]

bil-swæð n. (nap. -swaðu) _sword track, wound_, #Ex# 329.

bilw- = bilew-

bīlyht = bȳliht

bīma (m.?), bīme = bīeme

bin = binn

bīnama m. _pronoun_, A 8·313.

+bind n. _binding, fetter_: _costiveness_.

±bindan sv^3 _to tie_, _‘bind,’ fetter, fasten, restrain_, _Æ, Bl, Mt,
Jn_; AO, CP: _adorn_.

binde f. _head-band_? _KC_ 6·133. [‘_bind_’]

bindele, -elle f. _binding_: _bandage_.

bindere m. ‘_binder_,’ _Rd_ 28^6.

binding f. _binding_, OEG 324b.

binn, binne f. _‘bin,’ basket, crib, manger_, _Bl, LkL_.

binnan I. prep. (w. d. a.) _within, in, inside of, into_. II. adv.
_inside, within, less than, during, whilst_. [‘_bin_’]

binne = binn

bint pres. 3 sg. of bindan.

bio- = beo-, bi-

biosmrung = bismrung  [[redirected to “bismerung”]]

birce = beorc, beorce

bird (_LkLR_) = bridd

+bird = +byrd

birele = byrele

biren f. _she-bear_, OET (Ct).

birg == byrg

birgð, birhð pres. 3 sg. of beorgan.

birht- = bierht-

birig = byrig

birig- = byrg-

birihte (y) prep. w. d. _near, beside_, #An# 850.

birihto = bierhtu

birle = byrele

birnan = beornan

birst, birsteð pres. 3 sg. of berstan.

birst pres. 2 sg., bir(e)ð pres. 3 sg. of beran.

biryhte = birihte

bisæc n? m? _wallet_, MtR 10^10. [_L._ bisaccium]

bīsæc _contested, disputed_, LL.

bīsǣc f. _visit_, #Gu# 188.

bisceop (o^2) m. ‘_bishop_,’ _CP_: _high-priest, chief priest (of the
Jews)_, _heathen priest_, _AO, MkL_.

bisceopcyn (o^2) n. _episcopal (high-priestly) stock_.

bisceopdōm m. _episcopate, bishopric_: _ex-communication_.

bisceopealder m. _high priest_, HL.

bisceopfolgoð m. _episcopate_, GD 65^31.

bisceopgegyrelan mpl. _episcopal robes_, BH 90^2.

bisceophād m. _‘bishophood,’ office of bishop, ordination as bishop,
episcopate, bishopric_, _CPPs_.

bisceophādung f. _episcopal ordination_, ÆL 31^286.

bisceophām m. _bishop’s estate_, EC 365.

bisceophēafodlīn (o^2) n. _head ornament worn by bishops_, WW 152^23.

bisceophīred (o) m. _clergy subject to a bishop_.

bisceopian _to confirm_, _LL_. [‘_bishop_’]

bisceopland (o) n. _episcopal or diocesan land_, LL 173^10.

bisceoplic _‘bishoply,’ episcopal_, _BH_.

bisceoprīce n. _‘bishopric,’ diocese, province of a bishop_, _BH_.

bisceoprocc m. _bishop’s rochet, dalmatic_, #Lcd# 3·202^26.

bisceoprōd f. _bishop’s cross_.

bisceopscīr, -scȳr f. _diocese_: _episcopate_.

bisceop-seld, -setl, -seðl n. _bishop’s seat or see, bishopric_.

bisceopseonoð m. _synod of bishops_, A 11·8^1.

bisceopstōl m. _episcopal see, bishopric_, KC. [‘_bishopstool_’]

bisceopsunu m. _godson at a ‘bishoping’ or confirmation_.

bisceopðēnung f. _office of a bishop_, BH.

bisceopung f. _confirmation_, Æ.

bisceopwīte n. _fine payable to a bishop_? (BT), _forced entertaining of
a bishop_? (Lieb: v. LL 2·667).

bisceopwyrt f. _bishop’s-wort, betony, vervain, marshmallow_.

bisceopwyrtil (o^2) _vervain_, WW 134^41.

biscep == bisceop

bisceran = bescieran

biscerian (i^2, y^2) = bescierian

biscop == bisceop

biscup = bisceop

bisegu = bysgu  [[redirected to “bisgu”]]

bisen, bisene (y) fn. _example, pattern, model_, _JnLR_; Æ, AO, CP:
_similitude, parable, parallel_: _rule, command, precept_. [‘_bysen_’]

bīsene (y) _blind_, _MtL_; NC 274; JAW 22. [‘_bisson_’?]

±bisenian (ie, y) _to give, set an example, instruct by example_, _Bo_:
_follow an example or pattern_, CP: _express figuratively_.
[‘_byen_’ vb.]

bisenung f. _example, pattern_, Æ (y).

bises m. _the extra day intercalated in leap year_, #Men# 32. [_L._
bissextus]

±bisgian _to occupy, employ_, _Æ, Bo_; CP: _trouble, afflict_, _Lcd,
Met_. [‘_busy_’]

bisgu, bisigu f. _occupation, labour_, CP, Æ (yse): _affliction,
trouble_.

bisgung f. _business, occupation, care_, CP.

bisig (y) _‘busy,’ occupied, diligent_, _Ma, Sol_.

bisignes f. ‘_business_,’ _MtL_ (Cont. p. xx).

bismær- = bismer-

bisme = besma

bismer (y) nmf. _disgrace, scandal, shame, mockery, insult, reproach,
scorn_, _AO, Bl_; CP: _filthiness, defilement_, Æ (y). tō bismere
_ignominiously, shamefully_: _blasphemy_: _infamous deed_, AO.
[‘_bismer_’]

bismerful _infamous, disgraceful, ignominious, shameful_, Æ (y).

bismerglēow (y) n. _shameful lust_, Æ.

±bismerian (y) _to mock, revile, illtreat, blaspheme_, _Mk_; AO.
[‘_bismer_’ vb.]

bismeriend m. _mocker_, #KGl# 298.

bismerlēas _blameless_, #Cr# 1326 (y).

bismerlēoð n. _scurrilous song_, #Gl#.

bismerlic _shameful, ignominious, contemptuous_, AO: _ridiculous,
frivolous_. adv. -līce.

bismernes f. _pollution_; _insult_; _contemptibleness_.

bismer-sprǣc, -spǣc f. _blasphemy_, G.

±bismerung (y) _mockery, scorn_: _blasphemy_: _infamy, disrepute_, AO.

bismerword (æ^2) n. _reproach, insult_, LL 10^11.

bismor = bismer

bism(o)r- = bismer-

bisn- = bisen-

+bisnere f. _imitator_, DR 45^7.

bīspell (big-) n. _example, proverb_, Æ: _parable, fable, allegory,
story_, _MtL_; CP. [‘_byspel_’]

bīspellbōc (big-) f. _book of Proverbs_, Æ.

bissextus, gen. -te _the intercalary day of leap year_: _leap year_.
[_L._]

bist pres. 2 sg. of bēon.

bīst = bīdst, pres. 2 sg. of bīdan.

biswic = beswic

bit pres. 3 sg. of biddan.

bīt pres. 3 sg. of (1) bīdan; (2) bītan.

bita m. I. _‘bit,’ morsel, piece_, _Jn_; Æ. II. _biter, wild beast_.

±bītan^1 _to ‘bite,’ tear_, _B, Rd_; Æ: _cut, wound_: (+) _dash down_,
MkL 9^18.

bite m. _‘bite,’ sting_, _AO, Lcd_: _sword-cut_, _Ap, B_: _cancer_.

bitela m. ‘_beetle_,’ _Gl_.

biter _‘bitter,’ sharp, cutting_, _Gu_; Æ: _stinging_, #PPs# 117^12:
_exasperated, angry, embittered_: _painful, disastrous, virulent,
cruel_, _B, Bl_. adv. -līce, _Mt_.

bitere = bitre

±biterian _to be or become bitter_, CP: _make bitter_. [‘_bitter_’ vb.]

biternes f. _‘bitterness,’ grief_, _El_; Æ, CP.

biterwyrde _bitter in speech_, Æ.

biterwyrtdrenc m. _drink of bitter herbs_, WW 114^18.

bītl = bīetl

bitmǣlum _piecemeal, bit by bit_, #ÆGr# 239^10.

bitol n. _bridle_.

bītol m. _beetle_ (insect). [bītan]  [[from first edition]]

bitor = biter

bitre _bitterly, sharply, painfully, severely_: _very_.

bitres, bittres gsmn. of biter.

bitst pres. 2 sg. of biddan.

bītst pres. 2 sg. of bīdan and bītan.

bitt I. pres. 3 sg. of (1) biddan; (2) beodan. II. = bytt

bītt pres. 3 sg. of bītan.

+bitt n. _biting, gnashing_, Æ.

bitter == biter

bittor = biter

bittre = bitre

bitula = bitela

bið pres. 3 sg. of bēon.

biwāune v. bewāwan.

bīwist fm. _sustenance, food, provision, necessaries_, _Bo_, Æ.
[‘_bewiste_’]

bīword (u) n. _proverb, household word_: _adverb_, A 8·313^7.

bīwyrde n. _‘byword,’ proverb_, _WW_.

bixen = byxen

bizant m. _bezant (a gold coin)_. [_L._ byzanteum]

blāc I. (ǣ) _bright, shining, glittering, flashing_, _Rd_: _pale,
pallid, wan_, AO, CP. [blīcan; _‘bleak,’ to ‘bleach’_] II. pret. 3 sg.
of blīcan.

blac = blæc

blācern n. _lamp, candle, light_, CP (ǣ).

blāchlēor † _with pale cheeks_.

blācian _to turn pale_, Æ.

blācung f. _a turning pale, pallor_, Æ.

bladesian _to flame, blaze, be hot_: _emit an odour_, OEG 554.

bladesnung (at-) f. _odour_, WW 405^1.

bladesung (at-, æt-) f. _shining, lightning_, #EPs# 76^19.

blæc (a) I. _‘black’ dark_, _B, BH, Æ_. II. n. _ink_, _LL, WW_.
[‘_bleck_’]

blǣc == blāc

blǣcan _to bleach, whiten_. [blāc]

blæcce f. _black matter_, OEG 652.

blǣce n.? _irritation of the skin, leprosy_, #Lcd#.

blǣcernleoht (ā) n. _lantern-light_.

blæcfexede _black-haired_, ÆH 1·456^16. [feax]

blæcgymm m. _jet_, BH 26^16.

blæchorn (e) n. _ink-horn_, IM 128^18.

blǣco f. _pallor_, #Lcd#.

blæcpytt m. _bleaching-pit_? EC 383´.

blǣcðrustfel n. _leprosy_, Cp 103#b#.

blæd n. (nap. bladu) ‘_blade_,’ WW: _leaf_, _Gen_.

blǣd (ē) I. m. _blowing, blast_: _inspiration_, Æ: _breath, spirit_, Æ:
_life, mind_: _glory, dignity, splendour_: _prosperity, riches,
success_. II. = blēd I.

blǣdāgende _renowned_, B 1013.

blǣdbylig m. _bellows_, WW 241^33.

blǣddæg † m. _day of prosperity_.

blædderwærc m. _pain in the bladder_, #Lcd#.

blæddre = blǣdre

±blǣdfæst † _glorious, prosperous_.

+blǣdfæstnes f. _provision, sustenance_, ÆL 23b^492.

blǣdgifa † m. _giver of prosperity_.

blǣdhorn m. _trumpet_, Æ.

blǣdnes f. _blossom, fruit_, A 8·311. [blēd]

blǣdre (ē) f. _blister, pimple_, AO: ‘_bladder_,’ _Lcd_. [blāwan]

blǣdwela m. _abundant riches_, #Cr# 1392.

blǣge f. _gudgeon, bleak_, WW. [‘_blay_’]

blægettan (a) _to cry_, GD 278^12.

blǣhǣwen _light blue_.

blǣs = blǣst

blǣsbelg (OET 28) = blǣstbelg

blæse (a) f. _firebrand, torch, lamp_, _Æ, Jn_. [‘_blaze_’]

blæsere m. _incendiary_, LL.

blǣshorn m. _blowing-horn, trumpet_, LL 194 (8).

blǣst m. _blowing, ‘blast’ (of wind), breeze_, _Ex_: _flame_.

blǣstan _to blow_, #Andr# 123^30: _rush_? (v. BT).

blǣstbelg m. _bellows_, #Gl#.

blǣstm m? _flame, blaze_, MFH 90^7.

blǣtan _to ‘bleat,’_ _ÆGr, Rd_.

blætesung = bladesung

blǣts- = blēts-

blǣwen = blǣhǣwen

blǣwest, blǣwst pres. 2 sg., blǣw(e)ð pres. 3 sg. of blāwan.

blagettan = blægettan

blan pret. 3 sg. of blinnan.

blanca † m. _(white?) horse_, _B_. [‘_blonk_’]

±bland n. _blending, mixture, confusion, turmoil_.

±blandan^7 † _to blend, mix, mingle_, _Rd_. [‘_bland_’]

blandenfeax † _grizzly-haired, grey-haired, old_. [blandan]

blann pret. 3 sg. of blinnan.

blase = blæse

blasere = blæsere

blāstbelg = blǣstbelg

blaster = plaster

blāt † _livid, pale, wan, ghastly_: _low, hoarse (sound)_? #An# 1279.
[cp. blēat]

blātan _to be livid, pale_.  [[from first edition]]

blāte † _lividly, pallidly_, #Met#.

blatesnung = bladesnung

blātian _to be livid, pale_, #Gen# 981 (GK).

±blāwan^7 (ō) (tr. or intr.) _to ‘blow,’ breathe_, _Mt, Lk, Jn_: _be
blown, sound_: _inflate_: (+) _kindle, inflame_, WW 208^14: (+) _spit_,
MkLR 7^33.

blāwend m. _inspirer_, ÆH 2·478^8.

blāwere m. ‘_blower_,’ CP.

blāwung f. _‘blowing,’ blast_, _Æ_: _inflation_.

bleac = blæc

blēat _miserable_? _Gu_ 963. [‘_blete_’]. adv. blēate, B 2824.

blēað _gentle, shy, cowardly, timid_, _Rd_: _slothful, inactive,
effeminate_, AO. [‘_blethe_’; _Ger._ blöde]

blec == blæc

blēce = blǣce

blēcða ‘_vitiligo_,’ WW 53^28.

bled = blæd

blēd- = blēt-

blēd I. (ǣ) f. _shoot, branch, flower, blossom, leaf, foliage, fruit_,
_Mt, Lcd_; CP: _harvest, crops_. [‘_blede_’; blōwan] II. = blǣd I.

blēdan _to ‘bleed,’ let blood_, _Sol_.

blēdhwæt _growing quickly or profusely_? #Rd# 2^9.

blēdre = blǣdre

bledu f. _dish, bowl, goblet_, Æ.

blegen, blegne f. _‘blain,’ boil, blister, ulcer_, _Lcd_.

blencan _to deceive, cheat_, _Mod_. [‘_blench_’]

blēnd (e) pret. 3 sg. of blandan.

blend-an, -ian _to blind, deprive of sight_, _Bo_: _deceive_.
[‘_blend_’]

blendnes f. _blindness_, DR 38^5.

blent pres. 3 sg. of (1) blendan, (2) blandan.

±blēo n. gs. blēos, ds. blēo, gp. blēo(na), dip. blēom, blēo(w)um
_colour_, _Bo_; CP: _appearance, form_, _Sol_. [‘_blee_’]

blēobord † n. _coloured board, chess-board_.

blēobrygd n? _combination of colours, scintillation_, #Ph# 292.
[bregdan]

blēocræft m. _art of embroidery_, WW 354^9.

+blēod _beautiful_, #Cr# 909.

bleodu = bledu

blēofæstnes f. ‘_deliciæ_,’ #RPs# 138^11.

blēofāg _variegated_, #Gl#.

blēoh = blēo

blēomete m. _dainty food_, GD 99^18.

blēona gp. of blēo.

blēorēad _purple_, WW.

blēostǣning f. _tesselated pavement_, WW 444^10.

blēot pret. 3 sg. of (1) blātan, (2) blōtan.

bleoum dip. of blēo.

blēow pret. 3 sg. of (1) blāwan, (2) blōwan.

blēowum dp. of blēo.

blere, blerig _bald_, WW.

blese = blæse

blēt pret. 3 sg. of (1) blātan, (2) blōtan.

blētan = blǣtan

±blētsian _to consecrate, ordain_, _Mt, JnL_ (oe): _‘bless,’ give
thanks, adore, extol_, _Da, Ps, Lk_: _sign with the cross_, Æ:
_pronounce or make happy_, Æ. [blōd]

blētsingbōc f. _blessing-book, benedictional_, EC 250.

blētsingsealm m. _the Benedicite_, RB 36^18.

blētst pres. 2 sg. of blōtan.

blētsung f. _consecration_, _Chr_: _‘blessing,’ benediction_, _Chr_; Æ:
_favour (of God)_, #Bl, VPs#.

blēw = blēow pret. 3 sg. of blāwan.

blēwð pres. 3 sg. of blōwan.

blīcan^1 _to glitter, shine, gleam, sparkle, dazzle_, _Sol_: _appear_,
#Sol# 144. [‘_blik_’]

bliccettan _to glitter, quiver_, #Gl#.

bliccettung f. _glittering, shining_, #VPs#.

blice m. _exposure_, LL 5[34].

blicgan = blycgan

blīcian _to shine_, OEG 1499.

blīcð pres. 3 sg. of blīcan.

blīds = bliss

blin imperat. of blinnan.

blind ‘_blind_,’ _Mk_; CP, Æ: _dark, obscure, opaque_, _DD_; Æ:
_internal, not showing outwardly_: _unintelligent_: _not stinging_, WW
322^29. adv. -līce _blindly, rashly_, AO.

blindboren _born blind_, JnL 9^32.

+blinfellian _to blind, blindfold_, HL ^276.

-blindian v. of-b.

blindnes f. _blindness_, Æ.

blinn † n? _cessation_.

±blinnan^3 _to cease, leave off, rest from_, _Mt_; CP: _lose, forfeit_:
_be vacant (bishopric)_. [‘_blin_’; be, linnan]

blinnes f. _cessation, intermission_, LL.

blis (CP) = bliss

blisa = blysa

bliscan = blyscan

blisgere m. _incendiary_. [blysige]

bliss m. _‘bliss,’ merriment, happiness_, _Bl_; CP: _kindness,
friendship, grace, favour_, _Met_: _cause of happiness_, _Ps_. [blīðe]

±blissian (intr.) _to be glad, rejoice, exult_, _CP, Lk_; Æ: (tr.) _make
happy, gladden, endow_, †_Hy_: _applaud_, ANS 109·306. [‘_bliss_’]

blissig _joyful_, #RPs# 112^9.

blissigendlic _exulting_, ÆH 1·354^11.

blissung f. _exultation_, #EPs# 64^13.

blīð == blīðe

blīðe I. _‘blithe,’ joyous, cheerful, pleasant_, Æ, AO, CP: _gracious,
well-disposed, friendly, kind_, _El_: _agreeable, willing_: _quiet,
peaceful, gentle_, _Ps_: (+b. occurs at #Guth# 161^9). II. adv. _Ps_.

blīðelic _gentle, pleasant, glad_. adv. -līce (_Lk_). [‘_blithely_’]

blīðemōd _glad, cheerful_: _well-wishing, friendly_.

blīðheort † _happy, joyful_: _gracious_.

+blīðian _to make glad_, #RPs# 91^4.

blīðnes f. _joy, gladness, pleasure_, _Lcd_; AO. [‘_blitheness_’]

blīðs == bliss

blīwum = blēo(w)um, dp. of blēo.

blod = bold

blōd n. ‘_blood_,’ _Æ, G, Lcd_; AO, CP: _vein_.

blōd-dolg, -dolh n. _bleeding wound_, #Lcd#.

blōddryne m. _bloodshed_, AO 162^3.

blōdegesa m. _bloody horror_, #Ex# 477.

+blōdegian = blōdgian

blōden _bloody_, WW 217^35?

blōdfāg † _blood-stained, bloody_.

blōdgemang n. _a blood-mixture_, WW 220^7.

blōdgemenged _blood-stained_, W 182^11.

blōdgēot = blōdgȳte  [[headword spelled “blōdgyte”]]

blōdgēotend m. _shedder of blood_, #LPs# 50^16.

blōdgēotende _bloody_, #LPs# 5^8.

±blōdgian _to be bloodthirsty_, WW 215^43: _make bloody_.

blōdgyte m. _bloodshed_, AO.

blōdhrǣcung f. _spitting of blood_, WW 113^6.

blōdhrēow _sanguinary, cruel_, #Ps#.

blōdig ‘_bloody_,’ _WW_; AO.

blōdigtōð _bloody-toothed_, B 2083.

blōd-lǣs, -læswu f. _blood-letting, bleeding_.

blōdlǣstīd f. _time for blood-letting_, #Lcd# 55a.

blōdlǣtere m. _blood-letter_, WW.

blōdlēas _bloodless_, #ÆGr# 56^14.

blōd-orc, -mōnað = blōtorc, etc.

blōdrēad _blood-red_.

blōdrēow = blōdhrēow

blōdryne m. _issue of blood, bloody flux_: _bursting of a blood-vessel_,
AO 288^27.

blōdsæx (e) n. _lancet_, #Gl#.

blodscēawung f. _supply of blood_? (BT) #Lcd# 83a.

blōdseten _something to stop bleeding_, #Lcd#.

blōdsihte f. _flowing of blood_, #Lcd# 64a.

blōdðigen f. _tasting of blood_, LL.

blōdwīte n. _blood-offering_, #LPs# 15^4.

blōdyrnende _having an issue of blood_, BH 78^16#b#.

blōma m. _lump of metal, mass_, #Gl#.

blon pret. 3 sg. of blinnan.

blonca = blanca

blond- = bland-

blonn pret. 3 sg. of blinnan.

blōsa, blōsma = blōstma  [[under “blōstm”]]

blōstbǣre = blōstmbǣre

blōstm (Æ), blōstma mf. _‘blossom,’ flower, fruit_, _Bl, Lcd_.

blōstmbǣre (Æ), -bǣrende _flower-bearing_.

blōstmfrēols m. _floral festival_, OEG 4720.

blōstmian _to ‘blossom,’ bloom_, BH.

±blōt n. _sacrifice_, AO. [blōd]

blōt- = blōd-

blōtan^7 (and ? wv) _to sacrifice, kill for sacrifice_, AO, CP.

blōtere m. _sacrificer_, GPH 398^99.

blōtmōnað m. _month of sacrifice_ (8 Oct.-8 Nov.), _November_.

blōtorc m. _sacrificial vessel_, GPH 397.

blōtspīung f. _spitting of blood_, WW 113^7.

blōtung f. _sacrifice_, AO 102^16.

±blōwan I. sv^7 _to ‘blow,’ flower, flourish, blossom_, _Lcd_. II. =
blāwan

blōwendlic _blooming_, WW 240^28.

blunnen pp., blunnon pret. pl. of blinnan.

-blycgan v. ā-b.

blys, blyss = bliss

blysa m. _firebrand, torch_, Æ.

blyscan ‘_rutilare_,’ #HGl# 434^75 (v. OEG 1196 and ‘_blush_’).

blyse f. = blysa

blysere = blæsere

blysian _to burn, blaze_, #PPs# 17^8.

blysige = blyse

blyssian (Æ) = blissian

blȳðe = blīðe

blȳðelīce = blīðelīce

bō = bā, nafn. of bēgen.

bōc I. fn. ds. and nap. bēc _‘beech_’-_tree_, _WW_; Mdf: _beech-nut_, NC
274: ‘_book,’ writing, Bible_, _Bl, Jn, CP_; AO, Æ. Crīstes b. _gospel_:
_deed, charter, conveyance_, _LL_. II. pret. 3 sg. of bacan.

bōcæceras mpl. _freehold lands_.

bōcblæc (e) n. _ink_, W 225^1.

bōcce = bēce

bōc-cest, -cist(e) f. _book-chest_.

bōccræft m. _learning_, _Bo_. [‘_bookcraft_’]

bōccræftig _book-learned_.

bōcere m. _scholar, scribe, writer_, Æ.

bōcfell n. _parchment, vellum_, _LL_. [‘_bookfell_’]

bōcfōdder n. _bookcase_, WW 194^13.

bōcgesamnung f. _library_, WW 203^16.

bōcgestrēon n. _library_, BH.

bōchord n. _library_, _WW_. [‘_bookhoard_’]

bōchūs n. _library_, WW 185^35.

±bōcian _to grant by charter_: _supply with books_.

bōclæden n. _literary Latin, learned language_.

bōcland n. _land held by written title_, _LL_; Æ, AO. v. LL 2·323.
[‘_bookland_’]

bōclār f. _book-lore, learning_.

bōcleden = bōclæden

bōclic _of or belonging to a book_, Æ: _biblical, scriptural_. b. stæf
‘_ars liberalis_,’ #HGl# 503.

bōcon pret. pl. of bacan.

bōcrǣdere m. _reader of books_, WW 439^25.

bōcrǣding f. _reading of books_, WW.

bōcrēad _red colour used in illuminating manuscripts, vermilion_, WW.

bōcrēde f. _reading of books_, A 10·143^101.

bōcriht n. _right given by will or charter_, LL 444 (1).

bōcscyld m. _beech-wood shield_, TC 561^5.

bōcstæf m. nap. -stafas _letter, character_, _El_. [‘_bocstaff_’; _Ger._
buchstabe]

bōcstigel f. _beech-wood stile_, KC 5·70^25.

bōc-tǣcung, -talu f. _teaching or narrative, written in books_, LL.

bōctrēow n. _beech-tree_, Æ.

bōcweorc n. _study of books_, LL (314^18).

bōcwudu m. _beech-wood_, #Rd# 41^106.

±bod (+ exc. N) n. _command, message, precept_, _Bo, Hy_; Æ:
_preaching_. [‘_bode_,’ ‘_i-bod_’; _Ger._ gebot]

boda m. _messenger, herald, apostle, angel_, Æ, CP: _prophet_.
[‘_bode_’; _Ger._ bote]

bodan = botm

bode pret. of bōgan.

bodeg = bodig

boden pp. of bēodan.

bodere m. _teacher_, NG.

±bodian _to tell, proclaim, announce_, †_Hy_; AO, CP: _preach_, _Mt_; Æ,
CP: _foretell_, _El_: _boast_. [‘_bode_’]

bodiend m. _proclaimer, teacher, preacher_.

bodig n. _‘body,’ trunk, frame, bodily presence_, _Æ, BH_, _etc._, CP:
_main part_, #Lcd#.

bodigendlic _to be celebrated_, ÆL 7·232.

bodlāc n. _decree, ordinance_, #Chr# 1129.

±bodscipe † m. _command_: _message_.

bodung f. _message, recital, preaching_, Æ: _interpretation_:
_assertiveness_, RB 136^22.

bodungdæg m. _Annunciation Day_, ÆH 1·200^26.

bōg m. _arm, shoulder_, _Æ_; CP: _‘bough,’ twig, branch_, _Mt_; CP:
_offspring_. [būgan]

boga m. _‘bow,’ (weapon)_, _Gn_; Æ: _arch, arched place, vault_, _B_:
_rainbow_, _Æ_: _folded parchment_. [cp. _Ger._ bogen]

bōga = bōg

bōgan _to boast_, RB.

boganet = bogenett

bogefōdder m. _quiver_, WW 143^19.

bogen I. _name of a plant_, #Lcd#. II. pp. of būgan.

bogenett n. _wicker basket with a narrow neck for catching fish_, WW.

bogetung f. _curve_, WW 355^15.

bōgh = bōg

bōgian I. ±(intr.) _to dwell_, _Æ_: (tr.) _to inhabit_. II. = bōgan

bogiht _full of bends_, MtL 7^14.

bōgincel n. _small bough_, OEG.

bōgung (bōung) f. _boastfulness, arrogance, display_, Æ.

bōh = bōg

bōhscyld m. _shoulder shield_, EC 226´.

bohte pret. 3 sg. of bycgan.

bōhtimber n. _building timber_, AS 1^3. [bōgian, ES 42·172]

bōlan = bōgan

bol? m. _bole, trunk_, #Lcd# 143a.

bolca m. _gangway of a ship_.

bold (= botl) n. _house, dwelling-place, mansion, hall, castle_, _B_:
_temple_. [‘_bold_’]

boldāgend † m. _homestead-owner_.

boldgestrēon (botl) † _household goods_.

boldgetæl _collection of houses_: _(political) district, county,
province_, GD.

boldgetimbru † npl. _houses_.

boldweard (botl-) m. _housekeeper, steward_, Æ.

boldwela † m. _wealth_: _splendid dwelling, paradise, heaven_:
_village_, #Gen# 1799. (botl-)

bolgen pp. of belgan.

bolgenmōd † _enraged_.

bolla m., bolle f. _‘bowl,’ cup, pot, beaker, measure_, _ÆL, Jn, Lcd_.

bolster mn. _‘bolster,’ head-pillow, cushion_, _B_; CP.

+bolstrian _to support with pillows, prop up_, A 8·308.

bolt m. ‘_bolt_’: _cross-bow for throwing bolts or arrows_, _WW_.

bolttimber n. _building timber_, AS 1^3. [botl; v. ES 42^172]

bōn I. f. _ornament_, #Chr# 1063#d#. II. = bōgan

bon- = ban-

bond- = band-

bōnda m. _householder_, _LL_: _freeman, plebeian_; _husband_. [‘_bond_’]

bōndeland n. _land held by a_ bōnda, #Chr# 777#e#. [_ON._ bōndi]

bōne = bēn

+bōnian _to polish, burnish_, TC. [_Ger._ bohnen]

bonn == bann

bor _borer, gimlet_, #Gl#: _lancet, scalpel, graving tool_, #Gl#.
[borian]

bora m. _ruler_, #Sat# 500. [? rǣdbora]

borcen pret. 3 sg. of beorcan.

borcian _to bark_.

bord n. _‘board,’ plank_, _Æ, Gen_: _table_, _Ps_: _side of a ship_,
_Gen_: _ship_, _El, Gn_: _shield_, #El#.

borda m. _embroidery, ornament_, #Gl#.

bordclāð m. _table-cloth_, OEG 56^22.

bordgelāc n. _weapon, dart_, #Cr# 769.

bordhæbbende _shield-bearing_, B 2895.

bordhaga m. _cover of shields_, #El# 652.

bordhrēoða (ē) † m. _shield-ornament_: _phalanx_.

bordrand m. _shield_, B 2559.

bordrima m. _rim, edge_.

bordriðig _a stream running in a channel made of planks_? (BT), EC
450^11.

bordstæð n. _sea-shore_, #An# 442.

bordðaca m. _shield-covering, testudo_, #Gl#: _board for roofing_, WW.

bordweall m. _wall of shields, phalanx_: _buckler, shield_: _side of
ship_, #Rd# 34^6.

bordwudu m. _shield_, B 1243.

boren pp. of beran.

borettan _to brandish_, #Gl#.

borg m. _pledge, security, bail, debt, obligation_, _LL_ (v. 2·331;
641); CP: _bondsman_: _debtor_. [‘_borrow_’ sb.]

borgbryce m. _breach of surety_, LL.

borgen pp. of beorgan.

borggelda m. _borrower_: _lender_.

borgian _to ‘borrow,’_ _Mt, Ps_: _lend_: _be surety for_, OEG 3812.

borgiend m. _lender, usurer_.

borg-sorg (burg-) f. _trouble on account of lending or security_,
#Rim# 63.

borgwedd n. _pledge_, WW 279^16.

borh == borg

borhfæst _fast bound_, HL 18^254.

±borhfæstan _to bind by pledge or surety_.

borhhand fm. _security, surety (person)_, Æ.

borhlēas _without a pledge, without security_, LL 230[5].

borian _to bore, perforate_.

borlīce _very, extremely, fitly, excellently_, A 8·302, 307, 329.

born = barn, pret. 3 sg. of biernan.

+borsnung = +brosnung

borsten pp. of berstan.

borðor = beorðor

bōsig m? n? _stall, crib_, _LkLR_. [‘_boosy_’]

bōsm (CP), bōsum m. _‘bosom,’ breast, womb_, _Æ_: _surface_, _An_:
_ship’s hold_, _Gen_.

bōsmig _sinuous_, OEG 8^2.

bōt f. _help, relief, advantage, remedy_, _An, Da, Lcd_; AO:
_compensation for an injury or wrong_, _LL_ (v. 2·336): _(peace)
offering, recompense, amends, atonement, reformation, penance,
repentance_, _Bl_; CP. tō bōte _to ‘boot,’ besides, moreover_. [_Ger._
busse]

bōtan = bētan

bōtettan _to improve, repair_.

botian _to get better_.

±botl (CP, Æ) == bold

bōtlēas _unpardonable, not to be atoned for by_ bōt.

botm m. _‘bottom,’ ground, foundation_, _B, WW_: _abyss_, _Gen_.

bōtwyrðe _pardonable, that can be atoned for by_ bōt. [cp. bōtlēas]

bōð = bōgeð pres. 3 sg. of bōgan.

boðen mn? _rosemary_: _darnel_, Æ: _thyme_, GPH 390.

bōung = bōgung

box mn. _box-tree_, _WW_: _‘box,’ case_, _Mt_. [_L._ buxus]

boxtrēow n. _box-tree_, #ÆGr# 20^19.

braccas mp. _breeches_, #Lcd# 3·198^28. [_L._]

bracce (Mdf) = bræc I.

brachwīl f. _moment_, A 8·318.

-bracian v. ā-b.

brād I. comp. brādra, brǣdra _‘broad,’ flat, open, extended, spacious,
wide_, _Gen, Chr_; Æ, AO, CP: _ample, copious_, _B_; #El#. II. n.
_breadth_, #Rim# 13?

brādæx f. _broad axe_, #Gl#.

brādbrim † n. _wide sea_.

brāde _far and wide, broadly, widely_.

brādelēac n. _leek_, #Gl#.

brādhand f. _palm of the hand_, WW 264^34.

brādian _to extend, reach_, AO 234^10.

brādlāstæx f. _broad axe_, #Gl#.

brādlinga _flatly, with the hand open_.

brādnes sf. _breadth, greatness, extent, surface_, Æ: _liberality_.

brādpanne = brǣdepanne

bræc I. _a strip of unfilled land_? (BT), KC. II. = pret. 3 sg. of
brecan.

brǣc I. (±) n. _catarrh, cough_. II. f. _breaking, destruction_, ÆL
5^292. III. = brēc nap. of brōc I.

bræcce _breeches_, OET. [_L._]

brǣccoðu f. _falling sickness, epilepsy_, WW 112^27.

+brǣceo = brǣc I.

brǣcdrenc (ē) _cough medicine_, WW 351^88.

bræclian _to cackle, make a noise_, GD 236^12.

brǣcon pret. pl. of brecan.

±brǣcsēoc _epileptic, lunatic_.

brǣd I. f. _breadth, width_, AO. [brād] II. f. _flesh_, #Ph# 240.
[_OHG._ brāt] III. m. _trick, fraud, deceit, craft_. [= *brægd;
‘_braid_’] IV. pret. 3 sg. of brēdan, bregdan. V. pres. 3 sg. and pp. of
brǣdan.

brǣd- = brægd- (bregd-)

±brǣdan (e) I. _to make broad, extend, spread, stretch out_, _BH_; AO:
_be extended, rise, grow_. [‘_brede_’; brād] II. _to roast, toast, bake,
broil, cook_, _WW_. [‘_brede_’; _Ger._ braten]

brǣde m. _roast meat_, _WW_. [‘_brede_’; _Ger._ braten]

-brǣdels v. ofer-b.

brǣdepanne f. _frying-pan_ (v. WW 363#n#3).

brǣding I. f. _extension_, #Bo# 46^6: _bedding, bed_, DR. II. f. _roast
meat_, OEG 3760.

brǣdingpanne = brǣdepanne

brǣdīsen n. ‘_scalpellum_,’ #Gl#, WW.

brǣdra v. brād.

brǣdu, brǣdo f. _breadth, width, extent_, _Ps_. [‘_brede_’]

+brægd = brǣd III.

brægdan = bregdan

brægdboga m. _deceitful bow_, #Cr# 765.

brægden (e) I. (±) _deceitful, crafty_, AO. adv. -līce. [bregdan] II.
_fraud_.

brægdnes (ǣd-) f. _fraud, cunning_.

brægdwīs _crafty_, #Gu# 58. [bregd]

brægen (a, c) n. ‘_brain_,’ _Lcd, Ps_; Æ, CP.

brægenpanne f. _brain-pan, skull_, OEG 2815.

brægensēoc _brain-sick, mad_, OEG.

brægn = brægen

brægnloca (brægn-) m. _brain-house, head_, #Rd# 72^21.

brægpanne = brægenpanne

bræhtm (A) = breahtm

bræmbel, brǣmel == brēmel

brǣme (NG) = brēme

brǣr (ē) = brēr

bræs n. _‘brass,’ bronze_, _Æ_.

bræsen _‘brazen,’ of brass_, _LPs_; Æ.

bræsian _to do work in brass, make of brass_, #ÆGr# 215^17.

bræsne = bresne

brǣð m. _odour, scent, stink, exhalation, vapour_, _AO_. [‘_breath_’]

brǣw (ēa) m. _eye-brow, eye-lid_, _BH, Lcd, Ps, WW_; CP. [‘_bree_’]

bragen = brægen

brahtan = brohton pret. pl. of bringan.

brand (ō) m. _fire, flame_, _B_; Æ: _‘brand,’ torch_, _JnL, Da_; Æ:
_sword_, _B_.

brandhāt † _burning hot, ardent_.

brandhord (o^1) n? _treasure exciting ardent desires_ (BT); _care,
anxiety_ (GK), #Rim# 46.

brand-īren, -īsen n. _fire-dog, trivet, grate_, _WW_. [‘_brandise_’]

brandōm (o^1) m. ‘_rubigo_,’ WW 44^14.

brandrād (o^2, e^2) f. _fire-dog, trivet_, #Gl#.

brandrida m. _fire-grate_, WW 266^26.

brandstæfn (o^1) _high-prowed_? #An# 504. [= brant- ?]

brang pret. 3 sg. of bringan.

brant † (o) _deep, steep, high_, _An, El_. [‘_brant_’]

branwyrt f. _whortleberry plant_, WW 133^23.

brasian = bræsian

+brastl (-sl) n. _crackling (of flames)_, DD, W.

brastlian (-sl) _to roar, rustle, crackle_, _Æ_. [‘_brastle_’; _Ger._
prasseln]

brastlung f. _crackling, rustling, crashing_, _Æ_.

bratt m. _cloak_, _MtL_ 5^40. [‘_bratt_’]

brēac pret. 3 sg. of brūcan.

brēad n. _bit, crumb, morsel_: ‘_bread_,’ _JnL_.

+breadian = +bredian

brēag = brǣw

breahtm I. (bearhtm; æ, e, eo, y) m. _cry, noise, revelry_. II. =
bearhtm

breahtmian (earht) _to creak, resound_.

breahtmung f. ‘_convolatus_,’ WW 376^3.

breahtumhwæt = bearhtmhwæt

breard = brerd

brēat- = brēot-

brēað _brittle_, #Lcd# 1·260^7.

brēaw = brǣw

brēawern n. _brew-house_, WW 145^29.

brēc fp. _breeches_, _Lcd, RB_. [‘_breech_’; v. ES 38·345]

+brec n. _noise, sound_, CP.

±brēc = ±brǣc I.

±brecan I. sv^4 _to ‘break,’ shatter, burst, tear_, _B, Bl, Ps_:
_curtail, injure, violate, destroy, oppress_, _B, Da, KC_; AO, CP:
_break into, rush into, storm, capture (city)_, _Ma_; CP: _press,
force_: _break or crash through, burst forth, spring out_, _An, Ph_:
_subdue, tame_, CP. II. _to roar_? #Cr# 951. [_ON._ braka]

brēchrægl n. _breeches_, #PPs# 108^28.

brecmǣlum = brytmǣlum

±brecnes f. _breach_, #EPs#.

-brecð v. ǣ-, eodor-b.

brecða m. _broken condition_. mōdes b. _sorrow of heart_, B 171.

brecung f. ‘_breaking_,’ _LkR_.

bred n. _surface_: _board, plank_, CP: _tablet_, _Æ_. [‘_bred_’]

brēd = (1) brȳd, (2) brād, (3) brǣd III.

brēdan I. _to produce, or cherish, a brood_, _Æ_. [‘_breed_’] II. (±) =
bregdan. III. (±) = brǣdan I. and II.

breden (i, y) _of boards, wooden_, Æ.

brēdende _deceitful, cunning_, AO. [bregdan]

brēdettan = brogdettan

+bredian † (ea) _to regenerate, restore_.

brēdi(ng)panne = brǣdepanne

brēdīsern = brǣdīsen

bredweall m. _wall of boards, palisade_, ES 20·148.

bredwian (eo) _to strike down, trample_.

+brēfan _to write down_, A 8·308^11. [cp. _Ger._ brief]

brēg (#VPs#) = brǣw

brega (Æ) = brego

brēgan _to alarm, frighten, terrify_, _Lk_; Æ, CP. [‘_bree_’; brōga]

bregd = brǣd III.

+bregd I. n. _movement, change_, #Ph# 57. II. = brǣd III.

bregdan^3 (brēd-) _to move quickly, pull, shake, swing, throw
(wrestling)_, _draw (sword)_, _drag_, _B, Ma_: _bend, weave_, _‘braid,’
knit, join together_, _ÆGr_: _change colour, vary, be transformed_, _Ex,
Sol, Gu_: _bind, knot_: (intr.) _move, be pulled_: _flash_, Æ. up b.
_bring up (a charge)_: (+) _scheme, feign, pretend_: (+) _draw breath,
breathe_.

bregden = brægden

+bregdnes f. _trouble, affliction_, MF 162.

+bregdstafas mp. _learned arts_, #Sol# 2.

bregen = brægen

brēgendlic _terrible_, #RPs# 46^3.

brēgh = brǣw

brēgnes f. _fear, terror_.

brego † (eo) m. _ruler, chief, king, Lord_. b. engla, mancynnes _God_.

bregorīce n. _kingdom_, #Gen# 1633.

bregorōf _majestic, mighty_, B 1925.

bregostōl † m. _ruler’s seat, throne_: _rule, dominion_.

bregoweard † m. _ruler, prince, lord_.

bregu = brego

breht- = breaht-, beorht-, bierht-

brehtniende = bearhtmiende  [[redirected to “breahtmian”]]

brēman I. (±) _to honour, extol_. [brēme] II. (oe) _to rage_, NG.

brembel (Æ), brember == brēmel

brēme (oe, ȳ) I. adj. _famous, glorious, noble_, _PPs_; AO. [‘_breme_’]
II. adv.

brēmel (ǣ) m. _brier_, _‘bramble,’ blackberry bush_, _Æ, Lcd_; Mdf.
[brōm]

brēmelæppel m. _blackberry_, #Lcd#.

brēmelberie f. _blackberry_, #Lcd#.

brēmelbrǣr † m. _bramble-brier_.

brēmellēaf n. _bramble-leaf_, #Lcd#.

brēmelrind f. _bramble-bark_, #Lcd#.

brēmelðyrne f. _bramble-bush_, Æ.

brēmen = brēme I.

brēmendlic _noted_, OEG.

brēmer == brēmel

brēmlas nap. of brēmel.

bremman _to rage, roar_. [_Ger._ brummen]

bremung f. _roaring_, WW 242^39.

brencð pres. 3 sg. of brengan.

brene = bryne

brēneð pres. 3 sg. of *brēnan _to make or dye brown_? (GK; BT reads
breneð = berneð pres. 3 sg. of bernan) #Run# 15.

±brengan (AO, CP) = bringan

brengnes f. _oblation_: (+) _food, support_, MkL 12^44. [*bringnes]

brenting m. _ship_, B 2807. [brant]

breo- = bre-

brēo- = brē-

brēod (NG) = brēad

breodian _to cry out_, #Mod# 28.

breoht- = bearht-, beorht-

brēosa (īo) m. _gadfly_, _WW_. [‘_breeze_’]

brēost nmf. (usu. in pl.) _‘breast,’ bosom_, _B, Lk, Lcd_; AO, CP:
_stomach, womb_: _mind, thought, disposition_, _Gen_; CP: ‘_ubertas_,’
#CPs# 35^9.

brēostbān n. ‘_breast-bone_,’ _WW_ 158.

brēostbeorg = brēostgebeorh

brēostbyden (e^2) f. _breast_, #Gl#.

brēostcearu † f. _heart-care, anxiety_.

brēostcofa † m. _heart, affections_.

brēostgebeorh m. _bulwark_, WW 466^14.

brēostgehygd †, -hȳd † fn. _thought_.

brēostgeðanc † m. _mind, thought_.

brēostgewǣdu † np. _corslet_.

brēostgyrd f. _sceptre_? OEG 3303; 2^188.

brēosthord † n. _thought, mind_.

brēostlīn n. _stomacher_, WW 407^8.

brēostloca † m. _mind, soul_.

brēostnet † n. _coat of mail_.

brēostnyrwet n. _tightness of chest_, #Lcd# 189b.

brēostrocc m. _chest-clothing_, WW 151^39.

brēostsefa † m. _mind, heart_.

brēosttoga m. _chieftain_, #Sol# 184.

brēostðing n. _region of the heart_, #Lcd# 3·146^18.

brēostwærc m. _pain in the chest_, #Lcd#.

brēostweall m. _breastwork, rampart_, WW 490^13.

brēostweorðung † f. _breast-ornament_.

brēostwylm (e^2) m. _breast-fountain, teat_: _emotion, sorrow_.

Breot- = Bryt-

brēotan^2 † _to break in pieces, hew down, demolish, destroy, kill_.

Breotas = Brittas  [[redirected to “Brytas” (Bryt)]]

Breoten, Breoton = Briten  [[redirected to “Bryten”]]

brēoton = (1) bryten; (2) pret. pl. of brēatan.
  [[redirected to “brēotan”]]

brēoðan^2 _to decay, waste away_, #Lcd# 63a.

±brēowan^2 _to ‘brew,’_ _AO_.

brēowlāc n. _brewing_, ÆL 17^103.

brēr (ǣ) f. _‘brier,’ bramble_, _Lcd, WW_.

brerd (ea, eo) m. _brim, margin, border, surface_, _Jn, WW_: _shore,
bank_, Æ. [‘_brerd_’]

brerdful _brim-full_, _ÆL_ 6^282. [‘_brerdful_’]

brērhlǣw m. _brier-hillock_, EC 450^9.

brērðyrne f. _brier-bush_, KC 6·221^13.

brēsan = brȳsan

bresen = bræsen

bresne (æ) † _mighty, strong_.

brēt pres. 3 sg. of brēdan, bregdan.

bret- = brit-, bryt-

brēð = brǣð

brēðer ds. of brōðor.

brēw (#KGl#) = brǣw

bric- = bryc-

brīc- = brȳc-

briceð pres. 3 sg. of brecan.

bricst pres. 2 sg. of brecan.

brid = bridd

brīd = brȳd

bridd m. _young ‘bird,’ chicken_, _Lk_; Æ, CP, Mdf.

brīdel, brīdels (ȳ) m. _‘bridle,’ rein, curb, restraint_, _Run_; Æ, CP.

brīdelshring m. _bridle-ring_, #El# 1194.

brīdelðwangas mp. _reins_.

briden = breden

brīd-gift = brȳdgift

brīdgifu = brȳdgifu

±brīdlian _to ‘bridle,’ curb_, _Bo_; CP.

briengan = bringan

brig = brycg

brīg = brīw

brigd n. _change or play of colours_, #Pa# 26. [bregdan]

brigdils (#Gl#) = brīdels  [[under “brīdel”]]

brihtan = bierhtan

brihtlīce = beorhtlīce

brim † nm. _surf, flood, wave, sea, ocean, water_, _B_: _sea-edge,
shore_. [‘_brim_’]

brimceald † _ocean-cold_.

brimclif n. _cliff by the sea_, B 222.

brimfaroð n. _sea-shore_ (BT) #Da# 322 (or ? 2 words).

brimflōd m. _flood, sea_.

brimfugol m. _sea-bird, gull_, #Wa# 47.

brimgiest m. _sailor_, #Rd# 4^25.

brimhengest † m. _(sea-horse), ship_.

brimhlæst † f. _sea-produce, (fish)_.

brimlād † f. _flood-way, sea-way_.

brimlīðend m. _sailor_: _pirate_.

brimmann † m. _sailor_: _pirate_.

brimrād † f. _(sea-road), sea_.

brimsa? _gadfly_? (v. NC 354).

brimstæð n. _sea-shore_, #An# 496.

brimstrēam † m. _current, sea_: _rapid, river_.

brimðyssa † m. _ship_.

brimwīsa m. _sea-king, captain_, B 2930.

brimwudu † m. _(sea-wood), ship_.

brimwylf f. _(she-)wolf of the sea or lake_, B 1507.

brimwylm m. _ocean surge, sea-wave_, B 1494.

bring m. _offering_, #CPs# 50^20.

±bringan^3 (e, y) (and wv) _to ‘bring,’ lead, bring forth, carry,
adduce, produce, present, offer_, _B, Bo, JnL_; AO, CP.

-bringelle v. on-b.

brīosa = brēosa

brīst, brītst, pres. 2 sg., brīt pres. 3 sg. of bregdan.

Brit- = Bryt-

brit- = bryt-

brīw m. _pottage, porridge_, _ÆGr, Lcd_. [‘_bree_’; _Ger._ brei]

±brīwan _to prepare food, cook_.

brīwðicce _as thick as pottage_, #Lcd# 190a.

broc I. n. _affliction, misery, care, toil, adversity_, _Bl, Bo_; Æ, AO,
CP: _disease, sickness_, Æ: _fragment_. [‘_broke_’; brecan] II. n. _use,
benefit_. III. _a kind of locust_? _WW_. [‘_brock_’] IV. = brocc

brōc I. f. (? only in pl. brēc, _q.v._). II. m. _‘brook,’ torrent_, _Bo,
WW_; Mdf.

brocc m. _badger_, _Lcd_. [‘_brock_’]

broccen _of badger’s skin_, WW 152^1.

brocchol n. _badger’s hole_, EC 239^12.

broccian _to tremble_, GD 156.

brōce = brȳce

brocen pp. of (1) brecan, (2) brūcan.

±brocian _to crush, hurt, afflict, molest_, Æ, AO, CP: _blame_. [broc]

broclic _full of hardship_, W 248^1.

brōcminte f. _brookmint, horsemint_.

brōcsēoc = brǣcsēoc

brocung f. _affliction, sickness_, ÆH 1·472^7.

brod _shoot, sprout_, LHy 6^3.

brōd f. ‘_brood_,’ _Æ_: _foetus_: _breeding, hatching_.

broddetan = brogdettan

broddian = brōdian

brōden pp. of brēdan.

brōdenmǣl † n. _damascened sword_.

brōder = brōðor

brōdet- = brogdet-

brōdian _to glitter, shine_, OEG.

brōdig adj. _broody_, A 8·309.

brōga m. _terror, dread, danger_, CP: _prodigy_.

brogden pp. of bregdan. [‘_browden_’]

brogdenmǣl = brōdenmǣl

brogdettan _to shake, brandish_: _tremble, quake_.

brogdettung f. _trembling, shaking_: _figment, pretence_.

±brogn _bough, bush, branch_, NG (v. ES 38·340 and JAW).

broht ‘_viscellum_,’ WW 54^1.

brōht pp., brōhton pret. pl. of bringan.

brōhðrēa m. _dire calamity_, #Gen# 1813. [brōga]

brōm m. _‘broom,’ brushwood_, _Lcd_; Mdf.

brōmfæsten n. _enclosure of broom_, WW 414^7.

brōmig _broomy_, #Bl# 207^27?

bron- = bran-

brond == brand, brant

brord m. _prick, point_: _blade (e.g., of grass or corn)_.

±brosnian _to crumble, decay, fall to pieces, rot, wither, be
corrupted_, AO, CP.

brosniendlic (Æ), +brosnodlic (#Bl#, W) _corruptible, perishable,
transitory_.

±brosnung f. _decay, corruption, ruin_, Æ.

+brot n. _fragment_, G. [breotan]  [[headword spelled “brēotan”]]

Broten = Bryten

broten pp. of brēotan.

brotettan _to burst forth, shoot, sprout_? (Napier) = brogdettan? (BT),
v. OEG 1218n.

broð n. ‘_broth_,’ _Lcd_. [brēowan]

brōðar, brōðer == brōðor

broðhund (WW 329^38; 548^19) = roðhund?

brōðor m. ds. brēðer ‘_brother_,’ _Chr, Mt, Lk_. nap. (±) brōðor,
brōðru, _Gen, Jn_: _fellow-man_, _Ps_: _co-religionist_, _Mt_: _monk_.

brōðorbana m. _fratricide (person)_, #Gen# 1526.

brōðorcwealm m. _fratricide (act)_, #Gen# 1030.

brōðordohter f. _niece_, WW 173^30.

brōðorgyld n. _vengeance for brothers_? #Ex# 199.

brōðorlēas _brotherless_, #Rd# 85^16.

brōðorlic ‘_brotherly_,’ _ÆGr_.

brōðorlīcnes f. _brotherliness_, BH.

brōðorlufu (-er) _love_, DR.

brōðorrǣden f. _fellowship, brotherhood_, Æ: _membership of a
brotherhood_.

brōðorscipe m. _brotherliness, love_, _MtL_: (+) _brotherhood,
fraternity_, AO. [‘_brothership_’]

brōðorsibb f. _kinship of brothers_: _brotherly love_.

brōðorslaga m. _brother-slayer_.

brōðorslege m. _fratricide (act)_, CP.

brōðorsunu m. _brother’s son, nephew_.

brōðorsybb = brōðorsibb

broðor-ðīnen, -ðīnenu f. _midwife_, Æ. [beorðor]

brōðorwīf n. _brother’s wife, sister-in-law_.

brōðorwyrt (e^2) f. _‘pulegium,’ penny-royal_, WW 300^24.

+brōð-ru, -ra mp. _brothers, brethren_, _Mt_. [‘_i-brotheren_’]

brōður = brōðor

+browen pp. of brēowan.

brū f. nap. brū(w)a, gp. brūna _‘brow,’ eye-brow, eye-lid, eye-lash_,
_Rd, WW_.

±brūcan^2 _to ‘brook,’ use, enjoy, possess, partake of, spend_, _B_.
brocen cyrtel _a coat which has been worn_, Æ: _eat_, _JnL_; Æ: _execute
an office_: _cohabit with_. [_Ger._ brauchen]

brūcendlīce _serviceably_, OEG 53^1.

brūcung f. _function, occupation_, BC 1·154^13.

brūdon, brugdon pret. pl. of brēdan, bregdan.

brūn _‘brown,’ dark, dusky_, _Bo, Ex_: _having metallic lustre, shining_
(v. NED).

brūna gp. of brū.

brūn-basu, -be(o)su _brownish-purple_, OEG.

brūnecg † _with gleaming blade_.

brūneða m. _itch, erysipelas_, #Lcd# 18a.

brūnewyrt = brūnwyrt

brūnfāg _burnished_? _brown-hued_? B 2615.

brungen pp., brungon pret. pl. of bringan.

brūnian _to become brown_, #Lcd# 106b.

brunna = burna  [[under “burn”]]

brūnwann _dusky_, #An# 1308.

brūnwyrt f. _‘brownwort,’ water-betony, wood-betony_, _Lcd_.

bruðon pret. pl. of brēoðan.

brūwa nap. of brū.

±bryce (i) I. m. _‘breach’ (‘bruche’), fracture, breaking_, _Æ_ (i),
_Gu, LL_: _fragment_, OEG. [brecan] II. _fragile, brittle, worthless,
fleeting_. [‘_bryche_’] III. m. _use, enjoyment, service, exercise,
advantage, gain, profit, fruit_, Æ (i), CP. [_Ger._ brauch]

brȳce _useful, profitable_. [brūcan]

-brycel v. hūs-b.

bryceð pres. 3 sg. of brecan.

brycg f. ‘_bridge_,’ _Æ_; AO, Mdf.

brycgbōt (i) f. _repairing of bridges_, LL.

brycggeweorc (i^1) n. _work of building or repairing bridges_.

brycgian _to ‘bridge,’ make a causeway, pave_, _An_.

brycgweard (i^1) m. _keeper or defender of a bridge_, #Ma# 85.

brycgwyrcende ‘_pontifex_’! DR 194^16.

±brȳc-ian, -sian _to use, enjoy_, DR: _profit, benefit_.

brycð pres. 3 sg. of brecan.

brȳcð pres. 3 sg. of brūcan.

brȳd I. (ē, ī) f. _‘bride,’ betrothed or newly-married woman, wife,
consort_, CP, Æ. brȳdes wǣde _wedding garment_: (†) _(young) woman_. II.
= brygd

bryd- = bred-

brȳd- = brīd-

brȳdbedd n. _bridal bed_, Æ.

brȳdbletsung (ī) f. _marriage blessing_, LL 72, 38, 1.

brȳdboda m. _paranymph, bridesman_, OEG 18b71.

brȳdbūr n., brȳdcofa m. _bride-chamber, bed-chamber_.

+bryddan _to frighten, terrify_, #Sol# 16.

-brȳde v. un-b.

brȳdeala, brȳdealo(ð) n. _bride-ale, marriage-feast_, _Chr_.
[‘_bridal_’]

brȳdelic = brȳdlic

brȳdgifta fpl. _betrothal, espousals_.

brȳdgifu f. _dowry_: (pl.) _espousals_, Æ.

brȳdguma (Æ, CP), brȳdiguma (Æ) m. ‘_bridegroom_,’ _Jn_: _suitor_.

brȳdhlōp n. _ceremony on conducting a bride to her new home, bridal,
wedding_, _Chr, MtL_. [‘_bridelope_’]

+brȳdian _to marry_.

brȳdlāc n. _bridal, wedded condition_, Æ; (pl.) _marriage ceremony_, Æ.
[‘_bridelock_’]

brȳdlēoð n. _epithalamium_, OEG.

brȳdlic _bridal_. b. gewrit _Song of Solomon_, WW 388^30.

brȳdloca m. _bride-chamber_, #Bl#.

brȳdlōp = brȳdhlōp

brȳdlufe f. _love of a bride_, #Jul# 114.

brȳdniht f. _wedding-night_, MH 14^28.

brȳdræst f. _bridal bed_.

brȳdrēaf n. _wedding garment_, MtL 22^11.

brȳdsang m. _epithalamium_, WW.

brȳdðing np. _nuptials_, _Bl_. [‘_brydthing_’]

brygc = brycg

brygd I. (bryd) m. _drawing out, unsheathing, brandishing_, LL. II. =
brǣd III.

bryht == beorht

bryhtan = bierhtan

±bryidan _to seize property improperly held by another_, LL. [=
*brigdan? BT]

brym, brymm == brim

brȳm- = brēm-

bryne m. _burning, conflagration_, _BH_: _fire, flame, heat_, _MtL_; AO:
_inflammation, burn, scald_, _Lcd_: _torch_: _fervour, passion_.
[‘_brine_,’ ‘_brune_’; beornan]

brȳne f. ‘_brine_,’ _WW_; Æ.

brynēadl f. _fever_, WW 238^26.

brynebrōga m. _fire-terror_, #Az# 161.

brynegield † (i^3) m. _burnt-offering_.

brynehāt _burning hot_, #Dom# 51.

brynelēoma m. _fire-gleam, flame_, B 2313.

brynenes f. _hard, fiery trial_, #HGl# 469.

brynetēar m. _hot tear_, #Cr# 152.

bryne-wylm, -welm † m. _wave of fire, flame, burning heat_.

bryngan = bringan

brynig † _fiery, burning_.

brynstān m. _brimstone_, NC 275.

bryrd = brerd

bryrdan _to urge on, incite, encourage_, #Met# 13^3. [brord]

bryrdnes f. _incitement, instigation_.

±brȳs-an, -ian _to ‘bruise,’ crush, pound_, _BH, DD_: _season_, #Sc#
20^20.

+brȳsednes f. _bruising, crushing_, WW 211^23.

brȳsewyrt f. _daisy, soap-wort_, _Lcd_ 1·374. [‘_bruisewort_’]

brystmian = brytsnian

brȳt pres. 3 sg. of brēotan.

Bryt m. _Briton_: _Breton_.

bryta = brytta

brytan = bryttian

±brȳtan _to crush, pound_: (+) _break up, destroy_.

-brytednes v. for-b.

Bryten (e, eo, i, o) f. _Britain_.

bryten (eo) _spacious, roomy_, #Sat# 687.

brytencyning † m. _powerful king_.

brytengrūnd m. _broad earth_, #Cr# 357.

Brytenlond n. _Britain_: _Wales_.

brytenrīce (eo) n. I. _spacious kingdom_, #Az# 107. II. _kingdom of
Britain_.

Brytenwealda m. _wielder of Britain, Bretwalda, chief king_.

brytenwongas mp. _spacious plains, the world_, #Cr# 380.

brȳtest pres. 2 sg. of brēotan.

brytian = bryttian

Bryt-land, -lond = Brytenlond

brytmǣlum _piecemeal_, OEG 1553n.

brytnere m. _steward_, CP 459^11.

±brytnian (i) _to divide, distribute, dispense, administer_, _B_.
[‘_britten_’]

brytnung f. _distribution_, WW 222^43.

brȳtofta pl. _espousals_, WW 171^5. [brȳd, ðoft]

Bryton = Bryten, Briten  [[both under “Bryten”]]

±brytsen f. _fragment_, FM, G.

brytsnian _to parcel out, distribute_, OEG 2195: (+) _enjoy, possess_,
ES 8·473^33.

brȳtst pres. 2 sg. of brēotan.

Brytt == Bryt

brytta † (e) m. _dispenser, giver, author, governor, prince, lord_.
sinces b. _treasure-giver, lord_. [brēotan]

+bryttan = +brȳtan

±bryttian (i) _to divide, dispense, distribute_, CP: _rule over,
possess, enjoy the use of_.

Bryttisc ‘_British_,’ _Chr_.

Bryttwealas, Brytwalas mp. _Britons of Wales_.

Brytwylisc _British, Welsh_.

bryðen f. _brewing, drink_, _Gu, Lcd_. [‘_burthen_’; broð]

brȳwlāc (Æ) = brēowlāc

bū I. n. nap. bȳ _dwelling_. [_Ger._ bau] II. v. bā, bēgen.

±būan anv. (intr.) _to stay, dwell, live_, AO: (tr.) _inhabit, occupy_:
_cultivate_. [_Ger._ bauen]

būc, bucc m. _belly, stomach_, _Æ_: _pitcher_, Æ: _beaver (of helmet)_?
[‘_bouk_’; _Ger._ bauch]

bucca m. _‘buck,’ he-goat, male deer_, _Æ, Lcd_; CP.

budda m. _beetle_, WW 543^10.

būde 3 sg., būdon pl. pret. of būan.

budon pret. pl. of bēodan.

būend m. _dweller, inhabitant_.

bufan (_Æ_; AO, CP) I. prep. (w. d.) _over, ‘above’_: (w. a.) _on,
upon_. II. adv. _above, overhead, before_.

bufan-cweden, -nemd, -sprecen _above mentioned_, GD.

bufon = bufan

būg- = bū-

±būgan I. (sv^2) _to ‘bow,’ bow down, turn, bend, stoop, sink_, _Æ, AO,
Rood_: _submit, give way_, _Æ, B, Chr_: _depart, flee, retire_, Æ, AO:
_join, go over to_, Æ: _convert_, Æ. II. = būan

būh imperative of būgan.

būian = būan

bul = bula I.

bula m. I. _ornament_. [_L._] II. _bull_? EC 449^22.

bulberende _wearing an ornament_, WW 195^37; OEG 8^318.

bulentse f. _a plant_, #Lcd# 44b.

bulgon pret. pl. of belgan.

bulluc m. _male calf, ‘bullock,’_ _Sc_.

bulot, bulut _ragged robin, cuckoo-flower_, #Lcd#.

būn = būan

bund f? _bundle_, MtL 13^30.

būnda = bōnda

bunden pp., bundon pret. pl. of bindan.

bundenheord _with bounden tresses_, B 3151.

+bundennes f. _obligation_.

bundenstefna adj. _(ship) with an ornamented prow_, B 1911.

bune I. f. _cup, beaker, drinking vessel_. II. _reed, cane_? _WW_
198^12. [‘_bun_’]

būnes f. _dwelling_, NC 292.

būr n. _‘bower,’ apartment, chamber_, _Gen, WW_: _storehouse, cottage,
dwelling_, _KC_; Æ. [būan]

±būr (usu. +; but būr at LL 92, 6, 3) m. _free-holder of the lowest
class, peasant, farmer_. [‘_gebur_’]

būrbyrde (æ^2) _of peasant birth_, Ct.

būrcniht n. _chamberlain, eunuch_.

būrcot n. _bed-chamber_, CP.

burg (burh) f. (gds. and nap. byrig) _any important dwelling within a
walled enclosure, fort, castle_, _Chr, WW_; CP: _‘borough,’ walled
town_, _AO, Mt_; Æ. [v. Mdf]

burg- v. also burh-.

burgāgend m. _city-owner_, #El# 1175.

burgat = burggeat

burgbryce m. _breaking into a (fortified) dwelling_, LL: _penalty for
that offence_, LL.

burgen = byrgen

būrgerihta np. _peasant’s rights or dues_, LL 446 (4).

burgeteld † n. _pavilion, tent_.

burgfæsten n. _fortress_, #Gen# 1680.

burgfolc n. _townspeople_, B 2220.

burggeat n. _castle-gate_.

burghege m. _fence of a ‘burg,’_ Ct.

burg-hlið † n. nap. -hleoðu _fortress-height_ (or ?= beorg-hlīð).

burglagu f. _civil law_, GPH 388.

burglēod, -lēoda m. _citizen_, AO.

burgloca † m. _fortified inclosure, walled town_.

burglond n. _native city_, #Cr# 51.

burgon pret. pl. of beorgan.

burgræced n. _fortress_, #Ruin# 22.

burgrūn f. _sorceress_; pl. _fates, furies_, #Gl#.

burg-sæl † n. nap. -salu _city-hall, house_.

burgsǣta (ē^2) m. _denizen of a town, citizen_, WW.

burgscipe m. _borough_, WW 497^18.

burgsele m. _castle-hall, house_, #Rim# 30.

burgsittende † mpl. _city-dwellers_.

burgsorg = borgsorg

burgsteall m. _citadel_? _city_? WW 205^36.

burgstede † m. _city, castle_.

burgtūn m. _city_, _Wif_ 31. [‘_borough-town_’]

burgðelu f. _castle floor_, _Fin_ 30 (burh-). [v. ‘_theal_’]

burg-waran, -waru fp., -ware (AO, CP), -waras, mp. _inhabitants of a_
‘burg,’ _burghers, citizens_.

burgweall m. _city-wall_, Æ.

burgweg m. _road, street_.

burgwīgend m. _warrior_, #El# 34.

burh == burg

burhbiscop m. _bishop of a city_.

burhbōt f. _liability for repair of the walls of a town or
fortress_, LL.

burhealdor m. _burgomaster, mayor_, Æ.

burhgeard m. _castle yard_, EC 328.

burhgeatsetl n. _jurisdiction over those belonging to the_ ‘burg’? _seat
in a court at the city gate_? (BT; or ? two words, v. LL 456, 2).

burhgemet n. _measure used in a town_, LL 477 (6).

burhgemōt n. _town’s meeting_, LL.

burhgerēfa m. _chief magistrate of a town, provost, mayor_, _WW_.
[‘_borough-reeve_’]

burhgeðingð f. _town council_, LL 228, 1, 2.

burhmann m. _citizen_, WW. [‘_borough-man_’]

burhrǣdden f. _citizenship_, WW 441^10.

burhrest f. _chamber-couch_, IM 125^86. [?= *būrrest, ES 38·347]

burhriht n. _town right, law in a town_, LL 477 (6).

burh-rūn, -rūne f. _fury, sorceress_, WW 245^16.

±burhscipe m. _township, civil district_.

burhscīr f. _city limits, city, township_, Æ.

burhsprǣc f. _courtly speech_, #Gl#.

burhstaðol m. _foundation of the wall of a_ ‘burg,’ #Lcd# 1·328^23.

burhðegn m. _living in a_ ‘burg’; or ?= būrðegn

burhwarumann m. _burgess_, BH 40^31.

burhwealda m. _burgess_, BH 40^31#b#.

burhweard † m. _city defender_.

burhwela m. _treasure of a city_, B 3100.

burhwelle f. _spring that supplies a town_? BT.

burhwerod n. _townsfolk_.

burhwita m. _town councillor_.

būrland n. _land occupied by peasants_, EC 384´.

burn f., burna (CP) m., burne f. _brook, small stream_, _Jn_; Mdf:
_spring or well water_, _CP, WW_. [‘_burn_’; _Ger._ brunnen]

burnon pret. pl. of biernan.

burnsele m. _bath-house_, #Ruin# 22.

burnstōw f? _bathing-place_, KC.

būrrēaf n. _tapestry_, TC 530^36.

būrscipe = burhscipe

burston pret. pl. of berstan.

būr-ðegn, -ðēn m. _page, chamberlain_.

burðre = byrðere

buruh = burg

būst pres. 2 sg. of būan.

būt m. _a vessel_, LL 455´ (?= būc; BT).

būta = (1) būtan, (2) būtū

būtan I. prep. w. d. and (rarely) a. _out of, outside of, off, round
about_: _except, without, all but, but only_; _besides, in addition to_:
_in spite of_. II. conj. (w. ind.) _except, except that, but, only_.
b. ðæt _except_: (w. subj.) _unless, save that_: (w. subst.) _except,
but, besides, if only, provided that_. III. adv. _without, outside_,
#Chr#. [‘_bout_,’ ‘_but_’]

būte = (1) būtan, (2) būtū

butere f. ‘_butter_,’ _Lcd_; Æ. [_L._]

buter-flēoge, -flēge f. ‘_butterfly_,’ _WW_.

butergeðweor n. _butter-curd, butter_.

+buterian _to butter_, #Lcd# 121a.

buter-ic, -uc = butruc

buterstoppa m. _butter-vessel_, WW 280^25.

būton = būtan

butre = butere

butruc m. _(leather) bottle_, Æ.

butsecarl m. _boatman, mariner_, _Chr_. [‘_buscarl_’]

buttorflēoge = buterflēoge

buttuc m. _end, small piece of land_.

būtū (būtwu, būta, būte) _both_ (neuter). v. also bēgen.

butueoh (#Chr#) v. betwux.

būtun = būtan

buturuc = butruc

būtwū = būtū

būwan = būan

bȳ = bū

bȳan (N) = būan

byccen (i) _of a goat, goat’s_, NC 275.

bȳcera m. = bēocere

±bycgan (i) _to ‘buy,’ pay for, acquire_, _Mt, Jn_: _redeem, ransom_:
_procure, get done_: _sell_, LL. [_Goth._ bugjan]

bycgend v. beccen.

bȳcn- = bēacn-, bīecn-

byd- = bed-, bid-

bȳd- = bīd-

  [[Printed on one line:
  byd-, bȳd- = bed-, bid-, bīd-]]

bydel m. _‘beadle,’ apparitor, warrant officer_, _Lk_; Æ: _herald,
forerunner_, Æ: _preacher_, Æ. [bēodan]

bydelæcer m. _land of a_ ‘bydel,’ KC 6·152^29.

byden f. _measure, bushel_: _bucket, barrel, vat, tub_. [_Low L._
butina; _Ger._ bütte]

bydenbotm m. _bottom of a vessel_, WW 123^4.

bydenfæt n. _bushel, barrel_.

bȳdla m. _worshipper_, NG.

bȳencg (DR) = bȳing

bȳend = būend

-byffan v. ā-b.

byfgendlic = bifigendlic

byfian (Æ) = bifian

byfor = beofor

byg- = big-

bȳg- = bī-, bē-, bīg-

  [[Printed on one line:
  byg-, bȳg- = big-, bī, bē-, bīg-]]

bȳgan = bīegan

byge (ȳ?; i) m. _curve, bend, corner, angle, cone (of a helmet)_, AO,
CP: _traffic, commerce_, LL 128, 5.

bȳgel = bēogol

bygen f. _purchase_, LL (328^11).

bygendlic _easily bent, flexible_, BH.

bygeð pres. 3 sg. of bycgan.

bȳgeð pres. 3 sg. of būan.

byht m. I. (±) _bend, angle, corner_, _Ct_: _bay, ‘bight.’_ [būgan]
II. † n? _dwelling_. [būan]

bȳhð pres. 3 sg. of būgan.

bȳing = bū I.

bȳl m? bȳle f? _‘boil,’ carbuncle_, _WW_.

bylcettan = bealcettan  [[under “bealcan”]]

±byld f. _constancy, confidence, boldness_. [beald]

bylda m. _builder_? _householder_? #Cra# 75. [bold]

byldan I. _to build, construct_, KC. II. = bieldan

byldu, byldo = bieldo

bȳle = bȳl

byledbrēost (= bylged- ?) _puff-breasted_, #Rd# 81^1.

bylewit = bilewit

bylg = belg

bylgan _to ‘bellow,’_ _MH_.

bylgð pres. 3 sg. of belgan.

bylig = belg

bȳliht (īly-) _ulcerous_, #Lcd# 63b.

bylwet, byl(y)wit == bilewit

bȳme (Æ) = bīeme

bȳmere (_WW_), bȳmesangere m. _trumpeter_, Æ. [‘_bemer_’]

bȳmian _to blow the trumpet_, _Ps, WW_. [‘_beme_’]

bynd = bind

byndele, byndelle = bindele

bȳne _cultivated, inhabited, occupied_, AO. [būan]

byrc = beorc

byrce = beorce

byrcholt n. _birch wood_, WW.

byrcð pres. 3 sg. of beorcan.

byrd I. (i) f. _birth_ (pl. w. sg. meaning). II. f. _burden_, GD 215^1.

+byrd I. fn.; +byrdo, -u f. _birth_, _Cr_: _descent, parentage, race_,
_BH_: _nature, quality, rank_, Æ, AO: (†) _fate_. [‘_birde_’; beran] II.
_burdened_, MtR 11^28. III. = +byrded

+byrdan _to beard, fringe, embroider_.

-byrdan v. +ed-b.

+byrdboda m. _herald of a birth_.

+byrddæg m. _birthday_, Mt 14^6.

byrde _of high rank, well-born, noble, rich_, AO.

+byrde I. _innate, natural_. II. = +byrd I.

+byrdelīce _energetically, zealously_, CP 160^19.

byrden = byrðen

byrdicge f. _embroideress_, WW 262^18.

byrdinenu = byrððinenu  [[headword spelled “byrððīnenu”]]

byrding f. _embroidering_, WW 294^10.

-byrding v. hyse-b.  [[under “hyseberðling”]]

byrdistre _embroiderer_ (v. ANS 123·418).

+byrdlic (AS 5^13) = +byredlic

byrdling _tortoise_, OEG 23^21.

-byrdling v. in-, frum-b.

byrdscype m. _child-bearing_, #Cr# 182.

+byrd-tīd f., -tīma m. _time of birth_.

+byrdu = +byrd I.

+byrdwiglere m. _birth-diviner, astrologer_.

+byrdwītega m. _astrologer_.

byre I. † m. (nap. byras, byre) _child, son, descendant_: _young man,
youth_. [beran] II. m. _mound_. III. (±) m. _time, opportunity_, Æ:
_occurrence_, AS 62^13. IV. m. _strong wind, storm_, GPH 400.

bȳre n. _stall, shed, hut_, _Gl_. [‘_byre_’]

+byredlic _suitable, fitting, convenient, congenial_, DR. adv. -līce.

byrele mf. _cup-bearer, butler, steward_, _B_. [‘_birle_’]

byrelian _to give to drink, serve with drink_, _Gu_. [‘_birle_’ vb.]

+byrelic = +byredlic

byren I. (and byrene) f. _she-bear_, _Æ_. [bera] II. = beren

-bȳren v. nēahge-b.

byres f. _borer, graving tool, awl, chisel_, #Gl#. [borian]

byreð I. = bierð pres. 3 sg. of beran. II. = pres. 3 sg. of byrian I.

byrg gds. and nap. of burg.

byrg- v. also byrig-.

+byrg I. (i) n. _taste_, DR 116^3. II. bēon on gebyrge (w. d.) _to help,
protect_. [beorgan]

byrga m. _security, surety, bail, one who gives bail_, #Gl#. [_Ger._
bürge]

±byrgan I. (i) _to raise a mound, hide_, _‘bury,’ inter_, †_Hy_; AO.
II. † (e, eo) _to taste, eat_. III. = beorgan

byrgels (e, i) m. _tomb_, _Æ, Ct_. [‘_buriels_’]

byrgelslēoð (e^1) n. _epitaph_, #HGl# 427.

byrgelssang m. _dirge_: _epitaph_.

byrgen (i, u) f. _burying-place, grave, sepulchre_, _El_; Æ, AO, CP:
_burial_. [‘_burian_’; beorgan]

+byrgen f. _caul_? #Lcd# 185a.

byrgend m. _grave-digger_, #PPs# 78^3.

byrgenlēoð n. _epitaph_, BH 94^12.

byrgensang m. _dirge_, OEG.

byrgenstōw f. _burying-place_.

byrgere m. _corpse-bearer_, _WW_. [‘_burier_’]

byrgian = byrgan

byrging I. f. _burial_. II. f. _taste_.

byrglēoð n. _dirge, epitaph_, #Gl#.

byrht = beorht

byrht- = beorht-, bierht-

byrhtm = breahtm

±byrian I. (impers.) _to happen, pertain to, belong to, befit_, _Æ, Mk,
MtR_; AO, CP. [‘_bir_’; ‘_i-bure_’] II. = byrgan I. and II.

byric = beorc

byrig = burg, and gds. of burg.

byrig- = byrg-, burh-

byrigberge f. _mulberry_, #Lcd# 86a.

+byrigednes f. _burial_.

byrignes I. f. _burial_, _BH_. [‘_buriness_’] II. f. _tasting, taste_.

-bȳrild v. nēah-geb.

byris = byres

byrisang (i) m. _dirge_, #HGl# 488^57.

byrl- = byrel-

byrla m. _trunk (of body)_, #Lcd# 58b.

+byrman _to ferment, leaven_: _swell up, be proud_. [beorma]

+byrmed n. _leavened bread_.

byrnan (Æ) = biernan

byrne I. f. _corslet_, _WW_; CP. [‘_burne_’] II. = burne, burn. III. =
bryne  [[II. under “burn”]]

byrnete f. _barnacle_, NC 275.

byrn-ham, -hama † m. _corslet_.

+byrnod _corsleted_, _ÆGr_ 256^16. [‘_i-burned_’]

byrnsweord n. _flaming sword_, #Bl# 109^34.

byrnwiga m. _corsleted warrior_.

byrn-wīgend, -wiggend † m. _corsleted warrior_.

byrs, byrse = byres

byrst I. (e) m. _loss, calamity, injury, damage, defect_, Æ. [berstan]
II. n. _(land-)slip_, KC 3·52^9 (v. also KC 5·112^19 and Mdf). III. f.
‘_bristle_,’ _Ep, Lcd_; Æ. [‘_brise_,’ ‘_brust_’] IV. pres. 3 sg. of
berstan. V. pres. 2 sg. of beran.

+byrsted _furnished with bristles_, OEG 23^3.

byrstful _disastrous_, #Chr# 1116.

byrstig _broken, rugged_: _afflicted_. [berstan]

+byrtīd = +byrdtīd

byrð I. pres. 3 sg. of beran. II. = beorð

byrðen f. _‘burden,’ load, weight_, _Bl, WW_; Æ, CP: _charge, duty_.
[beran]

byrðenmǣlum _a heap at a time_, ÆH 1·526^22.

byrðenmǣte (ē^3) _burdensome_, #KGl# 1011

byrðenstan m. _millstone_.

byrðenstrang _strong at carrying burdens_, ÆH 1·208^13.

byrðere I. m. _bearer, supporter_, Æ. [beran] II. f. _child-bearer,
mother_.

byrðestre (e) f. _female carrier_, #HGl# 498^18.

byrðling (e) m. _carrier_, OEG 4922.

byrðor = beorðor

+byrðtid = +byrdtīd

byrððīnenu f. _midwife_, GPH 392.

bysceop == bisceop

bysegu = bysgu  [[redirected to “bisgu”]]

bysen == bisen

bysig-, bysg- = bisg-

bysmer = bismer

bysmer- = bismr-

bysmerglēow n. _shameful lust_, Æ 23b^451.

bysmor = bismer

bysmr- = bismr-

bysn == bysen

byst = bist pres. 2 sg. of bēon.

bȳsting f. _beestings_, WW 129^2. [bēost]

byt I. = bit pres. 3 sg. of biddan. II. = bytt

bȳt pres. 3 sg. of (1) bēodan, (2) bēatan.

bȳtel, bȳtl = bīetl

byter = biter

bytla † = bylda

bytlan, ±bytlian _to build, erect_, Æ, CP. [botl]

+bytle n. _building, dwelling_, Æ.

±bytlung f. _building_, Æ.

bytme f? _keel_: _head of a dale_.

bytming f. _hulk, keel of ship_, Æ.

bytne = bytme

bȳtst pres. 2 sg. of bēatan and bēodan.

bytt I. f. _bottle, flagon_, _Mt, WW_; Æ: cask [‘_bit_’] II. _small
piece of land_, KC 3·85^11. III. pres. 3 sg. of biddan.

bytte = bytt I.

byttehlid n. _butt-lid_, WW 213^23.

byttfylling f. _filling of casks_, LL 178, 8, 1.

byð = bið pres. 3 sg. of bēon.

bȳð pres. 3 sg. of būan.

byðme = bytme

bȳwan (ēo, ī) _to rub, brighten, furbish up, adorn_.

byxen _made of boxwood_, WW. [box]




=C=


cæb- = cæf-

cǣc- = cēac-

cæderbēam = cederbēam

cæf == ceaf

cæfertūn = cafortūn

cæfester (cæb-) n. _halter_, #Gl#. [_L._ capistrum]

-cæfian v. be-, ofer-, ymb-c.
  [[“oferccæfian” only in participle “ofercæfed”]]

cæfing f. _hair-ornament_, #Gl#.

cæfl m. _halter, muzzle_, WW.

cǣg f., cǣga m. ‘_key_’ (lit. and fig.), _Ex, LL, Rd_: _solution,
explanation_, _CP_.

cǣgbora m. _key-bearer, jailor_.

cǣghiorde m. _keeper of the keys, steward_, WW.

cǣgloca m. _locked depository_, LL 362, 76, 1.

-cǣglod v. ā-c.

cæh- = ceah-

cæl- = cel-, ceal-, ciel-

cælð pres. 3 sg. of calan.

cæm- = cem-

cæn- = cen-, cyn-

cǣpehūs = cīepehūs

cæppe f. ‘_cap_,’ _WW_: _cope, hood_. [_Lat._ cappa]

cæpse f. _box_, NC 276. [_L._ capsa]

cær- = car-, cear-, cer-, cier-

cærse (e) f. _‘cress,’ water-cress_, _Lcd_; Mdf.

cærsiht _full of cress_, KC 3·121^18.

cærte = carte

cǣs = cēas pret. 3 sg. of cēosan.

cǣse = cīse

cæstel = castel

cæster (NG) == ceaster

cāf _quick, active, prompt_, Æ: _bold, brave_. adv. cāfe.

cāflic _bold_. adv. -līce _promptly_: _boldly_, Æ.

caflwyrt = cawlwyrt

cāfnes f. _energy_, ÆH 2·282^4.

  [[See separate entries for “cawl II.” and “wyrt”.]]

cafortūn (æ, ea^1, e^2) m. _vestibule, court, court-yard_, Æ: _hall,
residence_, Æ.

cāfscipe m. _alacrity, boldness_.

+cafstrian _to bridle, curb_, CP. [cæfester]

cahhetan = ceahhetan

cāl = cawl

cāl- = cawel-

  [[Printed on one line:
  cāl == cawl, cawel]]

calan^6 _to grow cool or cold_.

calc I. m. _shoe, sandal_. [_L._ calceus] II. = cealc

calcatrippe = coltetræppe

calcrond _shod (of horses)_, #GnE# 143.

cald (A) == ceald

cālend m. _the beginning of a month_, AO: _month_, _Men_: (†) _span of
life_. [‘_calends_’]

cālendcwide m. _tale of days_, #Sol# 479.

calf == cealf

calfur (#VPs#) nap. of cealf.

calic m. ‘_chalice_,’ _Lcd, Lk, Mt, VPs_. [_L._ calicem]

-calla (ZDA 10·345) v. hilde-c.

calu (cal(e)w- in obl. cases) _‘callow,’ bare, bald_, _Rd_. [_Ger._
kahl]

calwer = cealer

calwer-clīm, -clympe _curds_? WW.

cāma m. _muzzle, collar, bit_, #PPs# 31^11.

camb (o) m. _‘comb,’ crest_, _Ep, WW_: _honey-comb_, #LPs#.

cambiht _combed, crested_, WW.

cambol = cumbol

camel m. ‘_camel_,’ _Mt, Mk_.

cammoc (u^2) nm? _‘cammock,’ rest-harrow_, _Lcd, WW_.

±camp (o) I. m. _combat, battle, struggle, warfare_, _B, Rd_. [‘_camp_’]
II. _field, plain_? EC 183^2. [_L._ campus]

campdōm m. _military service, warfare_, Æ.

campealdor m. _commander_, OEG 4433.

campgefēra m. _fellow-soldier_, #Gl#.

camphād m. _warfare_, BH.

±campian (o) _to strive, fight_, _Gu_; Æ. [‘_camp_’]

camplic _military_, Æ.

camprǣden f. _war, warfare_, #An# 4.

campstede † m. _battle-field_.

campung f. _fighting, warfare_.

campwǣpen (o^1) n. _weapon_, #Rd# 21^9.

campweorod (e^2, ea^2, e^3) n. _army, host_.

campwīg † (comp-) n. _battle, combat_.

campwīsa m. _director of public games_, #HGl# 405.

campwudu m. _shield_? #El# 51.

can pres. 1 and 3 sg. of cunnan.

cān m. _germ, sprout_? #PPs# 79^10. [_OS._ cīnan]

±canc n. _jeering, scorn, derision_, #Gl#.

canceler m. _chancellor_, #Chr# 1093. [_Low L._ canceliarium]

cancer m. _cancer_, Æ. [_L._]

cancerādl f. _cancer_, #Lcd# 41a.

cancerwund f. _cancerous wound_.

canc-etan, -ettan _to cry out, mock, deride_.

cancetung f. _boisterous laughter_, WW 382^36.

cancor = cancer

candel fn. _lamp, lantern, ‘candle,’_ _WW_; Æ. [_L._ candela]

candelbora m. _acolyte_.

candelbryd (?= bred; BT) _flat candlestick_, IM 120.

candellēoht n. ‘_candle-light_,’ _RB_.

candelmæsse f. _‘candlemas,’ the feast of the Purification_, _Chr_.

candelmæsseæfen n. _Candlemas eve_.

candelmæssedæg m. _Candlemas day_, NC 276.

candelsnȳtels m. _candle-snuffers_, WW 126^28.

candelstæf m. _candlestick_, _Mt_. [‘_candlestaff_’]

candelsticca m. ‘_candlestick_,’ _EC_ 250´.

candeltrēow n. _candelabrum_, MtR 5^15.

candeltwist m. _pair of snuffers_, #Gl#.

candelweoce f. _‘candle-wick,’ torch_, _WW_.

candelwyrt f. _candlewort_, WW 137^9.

candol = candel

cann I. f. _cognizance, averment, asseveration, clearance_, LL. II. (±)
pres. 3 sg. of cunnan.

canne f. _‘can,’ cup_, _WW_.

canon m. _canon, rule_. canones bēc _canonical books_. [_L._ canon]

canonic I. m. _canon_. II. _canonical_, Æ.

canoniclic _canonical_.

cans = canst pres. 2 sg. of cunnan.

cantel m? n? _buttress, support_, A 8·324^10.

cantelcāp m. _cope_, #Chr# 1070#e#.

cantercæppe f. _cope (vestment)_.

cantere m. _singer_, CM 904.

canterstæf m. _chanter’s staff_, EC 250.

cantic (Æ), canticsang m. _canticle, song_. [_L._]

-cāp v. cantel-c.

capellan m. _chaplain_, EC, #Chr# (late). [_L._]

capian _to look_. ūp c. _to look up, lie on its back (of the moon)_,
#Lcd# 3·266^23. capiende ‘_supinus_,’ GPH 393a.

capitel = capitol

capitelhūs n. _chapter-house_, IM 122^4.

capit-ol, -ul, -ula m. _chapter (cathedral or monastic)_: _chapter
(division of a book)_, _lesson_, _LL_: _anthem_. [v. ‘_chapitle_’]

capitolmæsse f. _early mass, first mass_.

+capitulod _divided into chapters_, LL (204^2).

cappa = cæppe

capun m. ‘_capon_,’ _WW_. [_L._ capōnem]

carbunculus m. _carbuncle_, CP. [_L._]

carc-ern (AO, CP), -ærn n. _prison, jail_. [_L._ carcer]

carcernðystru f. _prison darkness_, LL.

carcernweard m. _jailor_, MH 24^15,19.

cārclife = gārclife

care- = car-

carful (ea) _anxious, sad_, _Gu, Soul_: _‘careful,’ attentive,
painstaking_, _Ps, WW_: _troublesome_. adv. -līce, _LL_.

carfulnes f. _care, anxiety_: ‘_carefulness_,’ _Lcd_.

cargealdor n. _sorrowful song_, #Jul# 618.

cargēst m. _sad spirit, devil_, #Gu# 365.

carian _to care for, be anxious_.

caricum dp. of sb. _with dried figs_, ÆL 23b^661. [_L._ carica]

carig (ea, e) † _sorrowful, anxious_, _Cr, Soul_: _grievous_, DD.
[‘_chary_’]

carl m. _man_. [_ON._ karl]

carlēas _‘careless,’ free from care_, _RB_.

carlēasnes, carlēast f. _freedom from care, security_, _WW_.
[‘_carelessness_’]

carlfugol (ea^1, e^3) m. _male bird, cock_.

carlīce (ea) _wretchedly_.

carlmann m. _male, man_, #Chr#.

carr m. _stone, rock_, NG. [_Celtic_]

carseld (ea) n. _home of care_, #Seaf# 5.

carsīð (ea) _painful journey_, B 2396.

carsorg f. _sad anxiety_, #Gen# 1114.

carte (æ) f. _paper for writing on_, Æ: _document, deed_. [_L._ charta]

caru (ea) f. _‘care,’ concern, anxiety, sorrow_, _B, Lk_; AO.

carwylm (æ^2, e^2) † m. _welling sorrow_.

casebill n. _club_, GPH 394 (v. A 31·66).

cāserdom m. _imperial sway_.

Cāsere (Cāser, _JnL_) m. _Cæsar, emperor_, _Bo_; Æ, AO. [‘_Kaser_’]

cāsering f. _coin with Cæsar’s head on it, drachma, didrachma_, NG.

cāserlic _imperial_, WW 427^40.

cāsern f. _empress_, AO 266^14.

cassuc m. _hassock, sedge_, #Lcd#.

cassuclēaf np. _hassock or sedge leaves_, #Lcd# 170a.

castel I. m. _‘castle,’ fort_, _Chr_. II. n. _town, village_, _Mt,
Mk, Lk_.

castelmann m. _townsman_, #Chr#.

castelweall m. _city wall, rampart_.

castelweorc n. _castle-building_, #Chr# 1137.

castenere m. _cabinet, chest_, TC 531^7.

casul m. _over-garment_, _‘birrus,’ cloak_, _WW_. [‘_chasuble_’]

cāsus m. _(grammatical) case_, #ÆGr#.

catt m., catte f. ‘_cat_,’ #Gl#; Mdf.

caul [S 6#n#1] = cawl I. and II.

cawellēaf n. _cabbage-leaf_, #Lcd#.

cawelsǣd n. _cabbage-seed_, #Lcd#.

cawelstela m. _cabbage-stalk_, #Lcd#.

cawelstoc (cāl-) m. _cabbage-stalk_, #Lcd# 1·378^8.

cawelwurm m. _caterpillar_, WW 121^29.

cawl I. (e, ea, eo) m. _basket_, _AO_. [‘_cawl_’] II. m. _‘cole’
(‘caul,’ ‘cawel’), kale, cabbage_, _Lcd_.

cēac sm. _basin, pitcher, jug_, Æ, CP: _kettle, cauldron_, LL 24; 104;
116.

cēacādl (ēo) f. _jaw-ache_, #Lcd# 109a, 113a.

cēacbān n. _‘cheek-bone,’ jaw_, _WW_.

cēacbora m. _yoke for buckets_, #Gl#.

ceace f. _cake_? (BT) WW 505^10?

cēace (ē, ei, ēo) f. _‘cheek,’ jaw, jawbone_, _Lcd, WW_.

ceacga m. _broom, furze_, BC, KC.

ceacl = ceafl

ceaf (e) n. nap. ceafu ‘_chaff_,’ _Mt, Lk, WW_; Æ, CP.

ceaf- = caf-, ceaf-, cief-

ceaffinc m. _chaffinch_, ANS 76·206.

ceafl m. _jaw, cheek, jaw-bone, cheek-bone_, _Æ, Whale_. [‘_jowl_’]

ceaflādl (cealf-) f. _disease of the jaws_, #Lcd# 90b.

ceafor (e) m. _cock-_‘chafer,’ _beetle_, _Ps, WW_; Æ.

ceahhe f. _daw_, KC 3·48^26.

ceahhetan _to laugh loudly_.

ceahhetung f. _laughter, jesting_, Æ.

cealc (a) m. _‘chalk,’ lime, plaster_, _AO_; Mdf: _chalkstone, pebble_,
_Ep, WW_.

+cealcian (æ) _to whiten_, MtL 23^27.

cealcstān m. _limestone, chalk_.

ceald I. adj. _‘cold’ (‘cheald’), cool_, _Mt, Jn_; AO, CP. adv. cealde.
II. n. _coldness, cold_.

cealdheort _cruel_, #An# 138 (cald-).

cealdian _to become cold_, _Rim_. [‘_cold_’]

cealdnes f. _coldness, cold_, Æ.

cealer m. _pressed curds, jelly of curds or whey_. [_L._ galmaria]

cealerbrīw m. _pottage of curds_, #Lcd#.

cealf I. (æ, e) nm. (nap. cealfru) ‘_calf_,’ _Æ_. II. = ceafl

+cealf (e) _great with calf_.

cealfādl = ceaflādl

cealfian _to calve_, Æ.

cealfloca m. _calf-pen_.

cealfre = cealre, cealer

cealfwyrt (a) ‘_eruca_,’ WW 136^17.

ceallian _to ‘call,’ shout_, _Ma_ 91. [_ON._ kalla]

cealre = cealer and das. of cealer.

cealwa = calwa  [[form of “calu”]]

cēap (ē, ȳ) m. _cattle_, CP: _purchase, sale, traffic, bargain, gain_,
_B_; CP: _price_, _LL_. dēop c. _high price_. būtan cēape _gratis_:
_goods, possessions, property_, _Chr_; AO: _market_, _Æ_. [‘_cheap_’]

cēapcniht m. _bought servant, slave_, #Gl#.

cēapdæg m. _market-day_, WW.

cēapēadig? _rich, wealthy_, #Gn# 108.

cēapealeðel n. _alehouse_ (v. BT).

cēapgyld n. _purchase money, market price_: _compensation_, v. LL 2·338.

cēapian _to bargain, trade_, _Mt_: _buy_, _Jn, Cr_; AO: _endeavour to
bribe_, #Da# 739. [‘_cheap_’; _Ger._ kaufen]

cēapman m. _‘chapman,’ trader_, _BH, LL_.

cēapsceamul m. _seat of custom or toll, treasury_, G.

cēapscip n. _trading vessel_, AO 116^4.

cēapsetl (e^1) n. _toll-booth_, G.

cēapstōw f. _market-place, market_, CP.

cēapstrǣt (ē, ȳ) f. _market-place_.

cēapung f. _traffic, trade_, _LL_. [‘_cheaping_’]

cēapunggemōt n. _market_, WW 450^1.

cear == car

cearcetung f. _gnashing, grinding_, W 200^18.

cearcian _to creak, gnash_, _Æ_. [‘_chark_’]

cearde = cierde pret. 3 sg. of cierran.

+cearfan _to cut off, kill_, NG.

cearm = cirm

cear-rige, -ruce _a vehicle_? #Gl#.

ceart _wild common land_, KC.

cearwund _badly wounded_? LL 6[63].

cēas I. = cēast. II. pret. 3 sg. of cēosan.

-cēasega v. wæl-c.

cēaslunger _contentious_, v. NC 276.

cēast (ǣ, ē) f. _strife, quarrelling, contention_, _WW_: _reproof_.

ceastel = castel

ceaster (æ, e) f. _castle, fort, town_, CP: †_heaven, hell_.

ceasteræsc m. _black hellebore_, #Lcd#.

ceasterbūend m. _citizen_, B 768.

ceastergewar- = ceasterwar-

ceasterherpað _high road_? (BT), KC 5·217^1.

ceasterhlid n. _city gate_, _Cr_ 314.

ceasterhof n. _house in a city_, #An# 1239.

ceaster-lēod f. np. -lēode _citizens_, NC 276.

ceasternisc (æ) _urban, municipal_, TC 244^13.

ceaster-sǣtan, -sǣte mp. _citizens_, TC.

±ceaster-waran mp., -ware, -waru f. _burghers, citizens_.

ceasterweall (e^1) m. _city wall_.

ceasterwīc f. _village_, #Bl# 69^35.

ceasterwyrt f. _black hellebore_, #Lcd#.

cēastful _contentious_.

cēaw pret. 3 sg. of cēowan.

ceawl (_MtL_) = cawl I.

cēce (_VPs_) = cēace

cēcel (coecil) _cake_, #Gl#.

cēde (#VPs#) = cīegde pret. 3 sg. of cīegan.

cedelc f. _the herb mercury_.

ceder nmf. _cedar_. [_L._ cedrus]

ceder-bēam mn., -trēow (ȳ) n. _cedar-tree_.

cedor- = ceder-

cēdrisc _of cedar_, DR.

cef (Æ) = ceaf

cef- = cæf-, ceaf-, cif-

cēgan (VHy), cēgian = cīegan

cehhettung = ceahhetung

ceīce (MtLR) = cēace

ceig- (N) = cīg-

ceir _cry, clamour_, DR.

cel = cawl

cēlan (ǣ) _to cool, become cold, be cold_, _MH, VPs_ (oe): (+) _quench
(thirst)_, _refresh_. [‘_keel_’]

celc I. (M) m. _chalice, cup_. [= calic] II. = cealc

celde † f. _copious spring_? [cp. _Ger._ quelle]

celdre = ceoldre

cele = (1) ceole; (2) ciele

celen-dre f., -der n. _‘coliander,’ coriander_, _Lcd_.

cele-ðonie, -ðenie, cileðonie f. _celandine, swallow-wort_, #Lcd#.

celf (A) = cealf

celic = calic

cēling f. _cooling_, Æ: _cool place_, Æ.

celis _‘peditis,’ foot-covering_, A 37·45.

celiwearte = cielewearte

cell m. _(monastic) cell_, #Chr# 1129.

cellender n., cellendre f. = celendre

cellod (ē?) † part. _round_? _hollow_? _embossed_? _beaked_? #Fin# 29;
#Ma# 283.

celmertmonn m. _hireling_, NG (v. ES 42·172).

±cēlnes f. _coolness, cool air, breeze_, CP. [cōl]

celod v. cellod.

celras = ceallras, nap. of cealer.

±cemban (æ) _to comb_, _Æ_. [‘_kemb_’]

cemes f. _shirt_. [_L._ camisia]

cempa (æ) m. _warrior, champion_, _Gl, Ma_; Æ, AO, CP. [camp] [‘_kemp_’]

cempestre f. _female warrior_, OEG.

cēn † m. _pine-torch, pine_: _name of the rune for =c=_. [_Ger._ kien]

cendlic = cynlic

cēne _bold, brave, fierce_, _CP, Lcd, Ma_; Æ, AO: _powerful_, _VPs_:
_learned, clever_, _Met_ 10^51. [‘_keen_’; _Ger._ kühn] also adv.

cenep m. _moustache_: _bit (of a bridle)_. [_ON._ kanpr]

cenlic = cynlic

cēnlīce _boldly_, Æ. [‘_keenly_’]

±cennan _to conceive, bring forth_: _beget, create, produce_, _Mt, VPs_;
CP: _nominate, choose out_, Æ: _assign, attribute, give_: _declare, show
oneself, clear oneself, make a declaration in court_ (v. LL 2·32; 279
‘cennan,’ ‘Anefang’), _B, LL, Ps_. [‘_ken_’]

cennend m. _parent_, #Bl#.

cennendlic _genital_.

cennes f. _produce, what is produced_, EHy 6^22: _childbirth_:
_birthday_.

cennestre f. _mother_, Æ.

cenning f. _procreation_, CP: _parturition, birth_, Æ: _declaration in
court_ (v. cennan).

cenningstān (y^1) m. _testing-stone_.

cenningstow f. _birthplace_, Æ.

cenningtīd f. _time of bringing forth_, Æ.

cennystre = cennestre

Cent, Centescīr f. _Kent_. [_L._ Cantia]

centaur m. _centaur_.

centaurie f. _centaury_ (plant).

Centingas mp. _inhabitants of Kent, Kentish men_. #Chr#.

Centisc _Kentish_.

Cent-land, -lond (AO) n. _Kent_.

Centrīce n. _kingdom of Kent_.

Centware mp. _inhabitants of Kent_, #Chr#.

cēnðu f. _boldness_, B 2696.

cēo f. _chough, jay, jackdaw_, Æ.

cēoce (_WW_) = cēace

-cēocian v. ā-c.

ceod? ceode? _bag, pouch_, CP, LL.

ceodor- = ceder-

ceofl, ceol (NG) = cawl I.

cēol m. _ship_.

ceolas mp. _cold winds, cold_, #Az# 103. [ciele?]

ceolbor- = cilfor-

ceoldre = cealre

ceole (e) f. _throat_: _gorge, chasm_: _beak of ship_, #Gl#. [_Ger._
kehle]

ceolor m. _throat_.

cēol-ðel n., -ðelu? f. _deck of a ship_, #Hu# 8.

ceolwærc m. _pain in the throat_, #Lcd# 113a.

ceorcing f. _complaining_, GPH 398.

±ceorfan^3 _to cut, cut down, slay_, _Mk, Æ_; LkL: _carve, cut out,
engrave_: _tear_.

ceorfæx f. _axe_, AO 160^15.

ceorfingīsen n. _branding iron_, #Sc#.

ceorfsæx n. _surgeon’s knife, scalpel_, Æ.

±ceorian _to murmur, complain_, Æ, AO.

ceorig _querulous, complaining_, OEG.

ceorl m. _‘churl,’ layman, peasant, husbandman_, CP: _freeman of the
lowest class_, _LL_; AO, CP: _man_: _husband_, _Jn, WW_; CP: _hero,
noble man_.

ceorlǣs (= ceorllēas) _unmarried (of women)_, LL 360, 73#b#.

ceorlboren _low-born, not noble_, LL.

ceorlfolc n. _common people_, Æ.

±ceorlian _to marry_ (of the woman), _LL, Mt_; Æ. [‘_churl_’]

ceorlic = ceorllic

ceorlisc (ie) _of a_ ‘ceorl,’ _‘churlish,’ common, rustic_, LL, WW. adv.
-lisce.

ceorliscnes f. _rudeness, vulgarity_.

ceorllic _common, belonging to the people generally_. adv. -līce
_commonly, vulgarly_.

ceorlman m. _freeman_, LL 73; 463.

ceorlstrang _strong as a man_, WW 108^18.

ceorm = cirm

ceorran I. (sv^3) _to creak_, #Lcd# 160a. II. (+) = cierran

ceorung f. _murmuring_, Æ.

±cēosan^2 _to ‘choose,’ (‘i-cheose’), seek out, select_, _AO_; Æ:
_decide, test_: _accept, approve_, _B, Gen_.

ceosel (i, y) m. _gravel, sand, shingle_, _Ep, Mt_; Æ. [‘_chesil_’]

ceoselbǣre _gravelly, shingly_.

ceoselstān m. _sand-stone, gravel_, WW.

ceoslen (OEG 7^161), ceoslig (4^40) _gravelly_.

ceosol I. m? n? _gullet, maw_. II. = ceosel

±cēowan^2 _to ‘chew,’ gnaw_, _Æ, Soul_: _eat, consume_, Æ.

ceowl (NG) = cawl

cēowung (ī, ȳ) f. ‘_chewing_,’ _WW_ (ī).

cēp = cēap

cēp- = cēap-, cȳp-

  [[Printed on one line:
  cēp; cēp- = cēap; cēap-, cȳp-]]

cēpan I. _to ‘keep,’ guard, observe, attend, look out for, take heed_,
_Æ, Lcd, Ps_: _take_, Æ: _avail oneself of, betake oneself to, take to,
bear_: _seek after, desire_, _Æ_: _meditate_: _regulate by_: _seize_,
_Æ_. II. = cȳpan

cēpnian _to await eagerly_, NC 276.

cer = cierr

ceren I. (æ, y) n? _new wine, sweet wine_. [_L._ carenum] II. = cyrn
  [[under “cyrin”]]

cer-felle, -fille f. ‘_chervil_,’ _Lcd, WW_. [_L._ cerefolium]

cerge = carig

cerlic = cirlic

cerm = cirm

cerr == cierr

cers- = cærs-

cert- = ceart-, cyrt-

certare _charioteer_, ÆL 18^295.

ceruphīn _cherubim_, #El# 750.

ces- = ceos-

cēs- = cīs-, cȳs-

cēs = cēas pret. 3 sg. of cēosan.

Cēsar (AO) = Cāsere

cester == ceaster

cestian = cystian

cēte = cȳte

cetel, cetil = citel

cēðan = cȳðan

cewl (NG) = cawl

chor, chora m. _dance, choir (singers)_, CP: _church-choir (place)_.
[_L._ chorus]

chorglēo n. _dance_, #LPs#.

cīan sbpl. _gills_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ kieme]

cicel = cycel

cicen (y) n. ‘_chicken_,’ _Mt, WW_.

cicene (Æ) = cycene

cicropisc _cyclopean_? WW 217^13.

+cīd n. _altercation_, CP, DR, GD.

±cīdan (w. d. or wið) _contend, quarrel_, _Æ, WW_: _complain_: _‘chide,’
blame_, _Mk_; Æ, CP.

cīdde I. pret. 3 sg. of cīdan. II. = cȳðde pret. 3 sg. of cȳðan.

cīdung (ȳ) f. _chiding, rebuke_, AO.

ciefes = cifes

±cīegan (ē, ī, ȳ) (tr.) _to call, name_, Æ (i): _call upon, invoke,
summon, convene_, CP: (intr.) _call out_.

cield (o) f. _cold_. [ceald]

ciele (e, i, y) m. _coolness, cold_, _‘chill,’ frost_, _Bl_; AO, CP.
[ceald]

cielegicel † (y^1) m. _icicle_.

cielewearte (e^1, y^1) f. _goose-skin_, WW.

cielewyrt (y) f. _sorrel_.

cielf = cealf

cielle (i, y) f. _fire-pan, lamp_. [_OHG._ kella]

cīepa (e, i, y) m. _merchant, trader_, Æ.

cīepe = cīpe

cīepehūs (ǣ^1) n. _storehouse_, WW 186^11.

cīepemann (CP), cīepmann (LL) m. _merchant_.

cīepeðing (ē, ȳ) np. _goods, merchandise_.

cīeplic (ȳ) _for sale, vendible_, #Sc# 98^17.

cīepung (ē, ī, ȳ) f. _marketing, trading_, CP: _market-place, market_:
_merchandise_: _market dues_.

cierice = cirice

cierlisc = ceorlisc

cierm = cirm

cierr (e, i, y) m. _turn, change, time, occasion_, _Æ, CP, Lk, Lcd_:
_affair, business_. æt sumum cierrc _at some time, once_. [‘_chare_’]

±cierran (eo, i, y) (tr. and intr.) _turn, change_, _Ps, Sat_: (intr.)
_turn oneself, go, proceed, turn back, return_, _Mt_; Æ: _convert, be
converted_, CP: _submit_, #Chr#, W: _make to submit, reduce_.
[‘_chare_,’ ‘_i-cherre_’]

+cierrednes (y) _conversion_, Æ: _entrance, admission_, RB.

±cierring (e, y) f. _conversion_, NC 341.

cīese = cīse

cīest, cīesð pres. 3 sg. of cēosan.

cifes (ie, e, y) f. _concubine, harlot_, AO. [_Ger._ kebse]

cifesboren adj. _bastard_, OEG 5042.

cifesdōm m. _fornication_, OEG 5042.

cifesgemāna m. _fornication_.

cifeshād m. _fornication_, WW.

cīgan = cīegan

+cīgednes f. _calling_.

+cīgendlic _calling, vocative_, #ÆGr# 23^2.

cīgere (ei) _one who calls_, DR 194^1.

+cīgnes f. _calling, invocation, entreaty_: _name_, A 10·143^79.

±cīgung f. _calling, invocation_, NC 292.

cild (y) (nap. cild, cild-ra, -ru; gp. -ra) n. _‘child,’ infant_, _Mt,
Lcd_, _etc._; Æ, AO, CP: _a youth of gentle birth_, _KC_.

cildamæssedæg m. _Childermas, Innocents’ Day_ (Dec. 28).

cildatrog = cildtrog

cildclāðas mp. _swaddling-clothes_.

cildcradol m. _cradle_, Æ.

cildfēdende _nursing_, MtR 24^19.

cild-fōstre, -fēstre f. _nurse_, _LL_. [v. ‘_foster_’]

cildgeogoð f. _childhood_, ÆL 30^320.

cildgeong _youthful, infant_.

cildhād m. ‘_childhood_,’ _MkL_.

cildhama m. _womb_, Æ: _after-birth_.

cildisc ‘_childish_,’ _Gen_.

cildiugoð = cildgeogoð

cildlic _childish, young_, _BH_; Æ. [‘_childly_’]

cildru v. cild.

cildsung f. _childishness_, LL.

cildtrog (cilt-, cilda-) m. _cradle_, #Gl#.

cile (AO) = ciele

cilforlamb n. _ewe-lamb_, _Æ, WW_.

cilian _to be cold_. [ciele]

cilic m. _sack-cloth of hair_, NG. [_L._ cilicium]

cille = cyll

cim- = cym-

cimbal, cimbala m. ‘_cymbal_,’ _Lcd, VPs_. [_L._ cymbalum]

cimbalglīwere m. _cymbal-player_.

cimbing f. _commissure, joining_, WW 15^5; 206^12.

cimbīren n. _edge-iron_? (_joining-iron, clamp_? BT), LL 455[15].

cimbstān m. _base, pedestal_, #Sc# 226^2. [v. ‘_chimb_’]

cin = (1) cinn; (2) cynn n.

cin- = cyn

cīnan^1 _to gape, yawn, crack_.

cinbān n. _chin-bone, jaw-bone_, Æ.

cinberg f. _defence of the chin or cheek, cheek-guard_, #Ex# 175.
[beorg]

cincung f. _boisterous laughter_, WW 171^39.

cind = cynd

cine I. f. _sheet of parchment, folded, ‘diploma,’_ Æ. II. f. _chink,
fissure, cavern_.

cine- = cyn(e)-

cineht (io) _chinky, cracked_, WW 43^37.

cing, cining = cyning

cinn I. n. ‘_chin_,’ _WW_. II. = cynn n.

cinnan _to gape, yawn_? #Rim# 52.

cintōð m. _front tooth, grinder_, #Gl#.

cinu f. _chink, fissure_, _Æ, Bo, WW_. [‘_chine_’]

cio- = ceo-

cīo == cēo

cip = cipp

cīp- = cēap-, cīep-, cȳp-

cīpe (īe) f. _onion_. [_L._ cepa]

cīpelēac n. _leek_, WW 380^29.

cipersealf f. _henna-ointment_, WW 205^11. [_L._ cypros]

cipp (y) m. _log, trunk_: _coulter, ploughshare_: _weaver’s beam_, A
9·263.

cir = cierr

circ- = ciric-

circian _to roar_, #Lcd# 1·390^11 (v. A 31·56).

circolwyrde m. _computer, mathematician_, A 8·306.

circul m. _circle_: _cycle, zodiac_. [_L._ circulum]

circulādl f. _the shingles_, #Lcd#.

cirebald (#An# 171) = cynebeald?

ciricǣw nf. _marriage to the church_ (as when one takes orders), LL.

ciricbelle f. ‘_church-bell_,’ _Lcd_.

ciricbōc f. _‘church-book,’ manual of the church services_, _W_.

ciricbōt f. _repair of churches_.

ciric-brǣc f., -bryce m. _sacrilege_, Æ.

ciric-dor n., -duru _church-door_, LL.

cirice (ie, y) f. _‘church,’ religious community_, _Æ, BH, Mt_; CP:
_church (building)_, _temple_, _AO_; CP, Mdf: _congregation
(non-Christian)_, _Ps_.

ciricend m. _an ecclesiastic_.

ciricfrið mn. _right of sanctuary_: _penalty for breach of the right_,
v. LL 2·537.

ciricfultum m. _support from the church_.

ciricgang (y) m. _going to church_, LL 473[7]: _churching, purification
(of the B.V.M.)_, CM 484.

ciricgemāna (y) m. _church-membership_, W 103^23.

ciricgeorn _zealous in church-going_.

ciricgeriht n. _church-due_.

ciricgrið (y) n. _church-peace, right of sanctuary_, _LL_: _penalty for
breach of the right_, LL 263[3]; v. 2·537. [‘_church-grith_’]

cirichād m. _an order of the church_, LL.

cirichālgung f. _consecration of a church_.

cirichata m. _church-tormentor, persecutor_, W.

ciricland (y) n. _land of the church_, GD.

ciriclic _ecclesiastical_, _BH, Chr_. [‘_churchly_’]

ciricmǣrsung (y) f. _dedication of a church_, W 277^10.

ciricmangung f. _simony_, LL.

ciricmitta m. _church measure (of ale)_, TC 144^33.

ciricnēod f. _requirements of the church_.

ciricnytt f. _church service_, #Cra# 91.

ciricragu f. _church-lichen or moss_, #Lcd# 51b.

ciricrēn (y^1) n. _sacrilege_, LL 254#k#. [rān]

ciricsang m. _hymn_: _church-singing_.

ciricsangere m. _church-singer_, BH 466^17.

ciricsceat m. _‘church-scot,’ church-due at Martinmas_, _BH, W_.

ciricsceatweorc n. _work connected with the grain given as
church-scot_, KC.

ciricsōcn (y^1) f. _church-privilege, sanctuary_, LL: _territory of a
church_: _attendance at church_.

cirictīd f. _service-time_, LL.

cirictūn m. _churchyard_, LL.

ciricðēn m. _minister of a church_, LL.

ciricðēnung f. _church-duty or service_.

ciricðing n. _object belonging to a church_, LL 381[27].

ciricðingere m. _priest_, WW 155^29 (yrc).

ciricwæcce f. _vigil_, LL.

ciricwǣd f. _vestment_, LL 258[51].

ciricwāg m. _wall of a church_, LL.

ciricwaru f. _congregation_, LL 400´; 2·539.

ciricweard (e^2, y^2) m. _churchwarden, sexton_, Æ.

cirisbēam m. _cherry-tree_, #Gl#. [_L._ cerasum]

cirlic I. (e, y) _charlock_. II. = ciriclic

cirlisc = ceorlisc

cirm (e, ea, eo, ie, y) m. _cry, shout, outcry, uproar_, _MtR, WW_.
[‘_chirm_’]

cirman (e, y) _to cry, cry out, call, shriek_, _Gu, Jud_. [‘_chirm_’]

cirnel (#Gl#) = cyrnel

cirps (y) _curly_. [‘_crisp_’]

±cirpsian _to crisp, curl_.

cirr == cierr

cīs _fastidious_. [cēosan]

cīse (ǣ, ē, ȳ) m. ‘_cheese_,’ _WW_. [For compounds, v. also cȳs-]

cisel, cisil == ceosel

ciseræppel m. _dried fig_, WW 367^2. [= ciris-?, _cherry_ (BT)]

ciser-bēam, cisir- = cirisbēam

cīsnes f. _fastidiousness_.

cist (e, y) I. f. _‘chest,’ casket_, _Gl, JnR_: _coffin_, _BH, Lk_:
_rush basket_, _WW_: _horn_ (_as receptacle_?), WW. II. = cyst I.

cīst pres. 3 sg. of cēosan.

ciste = cist I.

cistenbēam m. _chestnut-tree_, #Gl#. [_L._ castanea]

cīstmēlum _earnestly_, OEG 4^32. [cēast]

citel m. _‘kettle,’ cauldron_, _Ep_ (e), _Lcd_ (y).

citelhrum (e^1) m. _kettle-soot_.

citelian v. _to tickle_.

citelung f. _tickling_, _WW_ 278^6. [‘_kittling_’]

citere, citre (y) f. _cithara_, #CJVPs#.

cīð m. _seed, germ, shoot_, _Æ_: _mote_, CP. [‘_chithe_’]

cīðfæst _well-rooted_, ÆH 304^26.

cīwung = cēowung

clā = clēa, clawu

clābre (#Gl#) = clǣfre

clac- = clæc-, cleac-

clacu f. _injury_, W 86^10.

+clāded (MkL 5^15) pp. of +clāðian.

cladersticca m. _rattle-stick_, #Gl#.

clæclēas _harmless_.

clædur (ea) _rattle_, #Gl#. [clader]

clǣferwyrt f. _clover_, #Lcd#.

clǣfre f. _‘clover’ trefoil_, _Lcd, WW_; Mdf.

clǣg m. ‘_clay_,’ _WW_.

clǣig ‘_clayey_,’ _Ct_.

±clǣman _to smear, caulk, plaster, anoint_, _Æ, Lcd_. [‘_cleam_’]

clǣming f. _blotting, smearing_, #ÆGr# 256^4.

clæmman (= clem-) _to press_, GD.

clæmnes f. _torture_, BH 290^2.

clǣne (ā, ē) I. ‘_clean_,’ _CP, Lk, Æ_: _pure, chaste, innocent_, _Æ,
Bl_: _clear, open_, _El, Lcd, Ps_. on clǣnum felda _in the open field
(of battle)_, CP 227^25: _honourable, true_: _acute, sagacious,
intellectual_. II. adv. _clean, clearly, fully, purely, entirely_, _Æ,
Ct_; AO, CP.

clǣngeorn _yearning after purity, celibate_.

clǣnheort _pure in heart_, Æ.

clǣnlic _(‘cleanly’), pure_, _Bo, Met_: _excellent_. adv. -līce = clǣne

clǣnnes f. _(moral) ‘cleanness,’ purity, chastity_, _BH_; Æ, CP.

clǣnsere (e) m. _priest_, CP 139^15; W 72^6.

±clǣnsian (sn-) _to ‘cleanse,’ purify, chasten_, CP: _clear out, purge_,
_Lcd_: (w a. and g.) _justify, clear oneself_.

clǣnsnian = clǣnsian

clǣnsung f. _‘cleansing,’ purifying, chastening, castigation,
expiation_, _Mk_; Æ: _purity, chastity_.

clǣnsungdæg m. _day for purging_, #Lcd# 1·330^8.

clǣnsungdrenc (sn) m. _purgative_, MH 72^27.

clæppettan _to palpitate_.

clæppetung f. _clapping_; _pulsation, pulse_, Æ.

clæppian (a^1) _to clap, beat, throb_.

clǣsn- = clǣns-

clǣð == clāð

clæweða = cleweða

clāf pret. 3 sg. of clīfan.

clāfre (#Gl#) = clǣfre

clām I. m. _paste, mortar, mud, clay_, _Æ, Lcd_: _poultice_. [‘_cloam_’]
II. = clēam dp. of clēa.

clamb pret. 3 sg. of climban.

clamm m. _band, bond, fetter, chain_, _An, Bl, Rd_: _grip, grasp_.
[v. ‘_clam_’]

clān- = clǣn-

clang pret. 3 sg. of clingan.

clappian = clæppian

clāsnian (#VPs#) = clǣnsian

clātacrop = clāte

clāte f. _bur, burdock, clivers_, _Gl, Lcd_. [‘_clote_’; _Ger._ klette]

clatrung i. _clattering, noise_.

clāð m. _‘cloth_,’ ‘_clothes,’ covering, sail_, _BH, Chr, Jn, Lcd_; AO,
CP. under Crīstes clāðum _in baptismal garments_, #Chr# 688#e#.

+clāðian (clǣðan) _to ‘clothe,’_ _NG_.

clāðwēoce f. _wick of cloth_, GPH 391.

clauster = clūstor

clāwan^7 _to claw_, Æ.

clāwian _to scratch, ‘claw,’_ _ÆGr_ 170^11n.

clawu f. nap. clawe ‘_claw_,’ _Æ, Gl, Ph_: _hoof_, _Æ_: _hook_, Æ: (pl.)
_pincers_?

clāwung f. _griping pain_, #Lcd#.

clea- = clæ-, cleo-

clēa = clawu

cleac f. _stepping-stone_, KC 4·36. [_Celtic_]

cleacian _to hurry_, Æ.

clēaf pret. 3 sg. of clēofan.

clēm- = clǣm-

clēn- = clǣn-

-clencan v. be-c.

clengan _to adhere_, _Rd_ 29^8. [‘_clenge_’]

cleo- = cli-

clēo- = clīe-, clū-

clēo = clēa, clawu

cleofa (ea, i, y) m. _cave, den_: _cell, chamber, cellar_, _Æ, BH_.
[‘_cleve_’]

clēofan^2 _to ‘cleave,’ split, separate_, _A, Br, Ct, GPH_.

cleofian = clifian

cleofu = nap. of clif.

clēofung f. ‘_cleaving_,’ _WW_.

clēone = clēowene, ds. of clēowen, clīewen.  [[under “clīewen”]]

cleop- = clip-

clep- = clæp-, cleop-, clip-

clerc == cleric

cler-ic (-ec, -oc; clerus, #PPs# 67^13) m. _‘clerk’ in holy orders_,
_WW_: _clerk in minor orders_, _LL_. [_L._ clericus]

clerichād m. _condition of a (secular) clerk, clerical order,
priesthood_.

cleweða (æ^1) m. _itch_, CP 71^19. [clāwan]

clib- = clif-

clibbor _clinging_, #Men# 245. [clifian]

+clibs (e; cleps; clæsp, y) _clamour_, CP.

clid-ren, -rin f. _clatter_.

cliepian = clipian

clīewen, cliewen? (eo, io, i, y) n. _sphere, ball, ball of thread or
yarn, skein_, _Æ, CP, Ph, WW_: _mass, group_. [‘_clue_’]

clif n. (nap. cleofu, clifu) _‘cliff,’ rock, promontory_, _An, B, Ct_;
Æ, CP.

clifa = cleofa

clifæhtig = clifihtig  [[under “clifig”]]

clīfan^1 _to ‘cleave,’ adhere_, _Æ, CP_.

clife f. _‘clivers,’ burdock_, _Lcd, WW_.

clifeht = clifiht  [[under “clifig”]]

clifer m. nap. clifras _claw_, Æ.

cliferfēte _cloven-footed_, ÆL 25^79.

clif-hlēp, -hlȳp m. _a cliff-leap, plunge to ruin_? (BT), #Gl#.

clifian (eo, y) _to adhere_, Æ, CP.

clifig, clif-iht, -ihtig _steep_, #Gl#.

clifr- v. clifer.

clifrian _to scarify, scratch_, Æ.

clifrung f. _clawing, talon_, GPH 398.

clifstān m. _rock_, WW 371^23.

clifwyrt f. _cliff-wort, water-wort, foxglove_, WW 134^3 and #n#.

+cliht pp. of +*cliccan, clyccan.

-clīm v. calwer-c.  [[under “calwerclīm”]]

climban^3 (y) _to ‘climb,’_ _Sol_.

climpre = clympre

clincig _rough_.

clingan^3 _to stick together_, _An_: _shrink, wither, pine_, _Æ_.
[‘_cling_’]

clipian (e, eo, y) (tr. and intr.) _to speak, cry out, call_, _Mt, Jn,
Ps_; CP: (±) _summon, invoke_, Æ; (w. d.) _cry to, implore_. [‘_clepe_’]

clipigendlic (y) _vocalic_, #ÆGr# 5: _vocative_ (gram.), #ÆGr# 23.

clipol _sounding, vocal_: _vocalic_.

clipung (e, eo, y) f. _cry, crying, clamour_, _MtR_: (±) _prayer_, #Ps#:
_call, claim_, #Chr#, 1129. ðā clypunga _kalends_. [‘_cleping_’]

clipur m. _bell-clapper_.

cliroc = cleric

+clistre = +clystre  [[under “clyster”]]

clite f. _coltsfoot_, #Lcd# 146a.

cliða (eo, y) m. _poultice_.

-clīðan v. æt-c.

cliðe f. _burdock_.

cliðwyrt f. _‘rubea minor,’ clivers_, #Lcd# 173b.

clīwe, clīwen = clīewen

cloccettan _to palpitate_, #Lcd#.

cloccian _to cluck, make a noise, rumble_, A 8·309.

clodhamer m. _fieldfare_, WW 287^17. [v. ‘_clod_,’ and Mdf]

clof- = cluf-

+clofa m. _counterpart (of a document)_, CC 80. [clēofan]

clofe f. _buckle_, #Gl#.

clofen pp. of clēofan.

clomm I. m. = clamm. II. pret. 3 sg. of climban.

clop m? _rock_? v. Mdf.

clott _lump, mass_, _HGl_ 488. [‘_clot_’]

clucge f. _bell_, BH 340^6.

clūd m. _mass of stone, rock_, _Æ, AO_: _hill_, ES 38·18. [‘_cloud_’]

clūdig _rocky, hilly_, _AO_. [‘_cloudy_’]

clufeht (i^2) _bulbous_, #Lcd#.

clufon pret. pl. of clēofan.

clufðung, clufðunge f. _crowfoot_: _a vegetable poison_, v. OEG 896.

clufu f. _clove (of garlic, etc.)_, _bulb, tuber_. [clēofan]

clufwyrt f. _‘batrachion,’ buttercup_, _Lcd_. [‘_clovewort_’]

clugge = clucge

clumben pp. of climban.

clumian, clummian _to murmur, mumble, mutter_.

clungen pp. of clingan.

clūs, clūse f. _bar, bolt_: _enclosure_: _cell, prison_. [_L._ clausum]

cluster = clyster

clūster = clūstor

clūstor n. _lock, bar, barrier_: _enclosure, cloister, cell, prison_.
[_L._ claustrum]

clūstorcleofa m. _prison-cell_, #An# 1023.

clūstorloc n. _prison_, #Gl#.

clūt m. _‘clout,’ patch, cloth_, _Ep_: _piece of metal, plate_, _Æ_.

+clūtod _‘clouted,’ patched_, _Æ_.

±clyccan _to ‘clutch,’ clench_, _IM, Sc_.

clyf = clif

clyf- = clif-, cleof-

+clyfte adj. _cleft_, GPH 393. [clēofan]

clymmian _to climb, ascend_, #Sol# 414.

-clympe v. calwer-c.  [[under “calwerclīm”]]

clympre m. _lump of metal_.

clyne n. _lump of metal_.

clynian I. _to roll up, enfold_, GPH. II. = clynnan

clynnan (intr.) _to resound, ring_, #El# 51: (tr.) _knock_, NG.

clyp- = clip-

clypnes f. _embrace_, BH 238^3.

clypp m., clypping f. _embracing_.

±clyppan _to embrace, clasp_: _surround, enclose_, _VPs_: _grip_, _Gen_:
_prize, honour, cherish_, _Æ, MkLR_ (io), _CP_. [‘_clip_’]

-clȳsan v. be-c. [clūse]  [[under “clūs”]]

+clysp = +clibs

clyster, +clystre n. _‘cluster,’ bunch, branch_, _Æ, Cp, WW_.

clȳsung f. _enclosure, apartment_, Æ: _closing, period, conclusion of a
sentence, clause_.

clyða = cliða

clȳwen = clīewen

cnæht (_NG_) = cniht

cnæpling m. _youth_, Æ. [cnapa]  [[under “cnafa”]]

cnæpp (e) m. _top, summit_, _Æ, Lk_: _fibula, button_, WW. [‘_knap_’]

+cnǣwe (w. g.) _conscious of, acknowledging_, Æ: _known, notorious,
manifest_, Æ.

cnæwð pres. 3 sg. of cnāwan.

cnafa, cnapa m. _child, youth_, _Æ, Sc_: _servant_, _Æ, Mt, Ps_.
[‘_knape_,’ ‘_knave_’]

±cnāwan^7 (usu. +) _to know, perceive_, _Æ, B, Jul, OEG_.

cnāwelǣcing f. _acknowledgement_, KC 4·193^12.

cnāwlǣc (ē^2) _knowledge_, ES 42·176.

+cnāwnes f. _acknowledgement_, EC 265^2.

cnēa gp. of cnēo(w).

cnearr m. _small ship, galley (of the ships of the Northmen)_, †#Chr#.
[_ON._ knorr]

±cnēatian _to argue, dispute_.

cnēatung f. _inquisition, investigation_: _dispute, debate_.

cnedan^5 _to knead_, _Lcd, LkL_.

cneht = cniht

cnēo == cnēow

cnēodan = cnōdan

cneoht = cniht

+cneord _eager, zealous, diligent_.

±cneordlǣcan _to be diligent_, Æ.

cneordlic _diligent, earnest, zealous_, Æ. adv. -līce.

±cneordnes f. _zeal, diligence, study_, #Gl#.

cnēordnes = +cnēorenes

+cnēor-enes, -ednes f. _generation, race_.

cnēores = cnēoriss  [[under “cnēorisn”]]

cnēorift n? _napkin_ (BT). _kneehose_? (Kluge), #Gl#.

cnēorisbōc f. _Genesis_, WW 414^29.

cnēorisn (#Bl#), cneoris(s), cneornis(s) f. _generation, posterity,
family, tribe, nation, race_.

cneorðlǣcan = cneordlǣcan

cnēow I. (ēo) n. ‘_knee_,’ _AO, Bl, El, Mt_: _step in a pedigree,
generation_, Æ. II. pret. 3 sg. of cnāwan.

cnēowbīgung f. _kneeling, genuflection_.

cnēow-ede, -ade _having big knees_, WW.

cnēowgebed n. _prayer on one’s knees_, Æ.

cnēowholen m. _‘knee-holly,’ butcher’s broom_, #Lcd#.

cnēowian (±) _to kneel_, _Æ_: _know carnally_, ÆL 12^7. [‘_knee_’]

cnēowlian _to ‘kneel,’_ _LL_.

cnēowmǣg m. nap. -mǣgas, -māgas _kinsman, relation, ancestor_.

cnēowrīm † n. _progeny, family_.

cnēowsibb f. _generation, race_ (BDS 8·527).

cnēowung f. _kneeling, genuflection_, CM.

cnēowwærc m. _pain in the knees_, #Lcd#.

cnēowwyrst f. _knee-joint_, WW.

cnepp = cnæpp

cnēw == cnēow

cnīdan^1 _to beat_, MtR 21^35.

cnieht = cniht

cnīf m. _knife_, _WW_.

cniht (e, eo, ie, y) m. _boy, youth_, _AO, Bl, LL_: _servant, attendant,
retainer, disciple, warrior_, _Chr, Mt, Met_: _boyhood_, _ÆGr_.
[‘_knight_’]

cnihtcild (eo^1) n. _male child, boy_.

cnihtgebeorðor n. _child-birth, child-bearing_, #Bl#.

cnihtgeong _youthful_, #El# 640.

cnihthād m. _puberty_, _‘youth,’ boyhood_, _Æ, Bo_; AO: _(male)
virginity_. [‘_knighthood_’]

cnihtiugoð f. _youth_, A 8·299.

cnihtlēas _without an attendant_, Æ.

cnihtlic _boyish, childish_, _Guth_. [‘_knightly_’]

cnihtðēawas mp. _boyish ways_, GD 111^9.

cnihtwesende † _when a boy, as a youth_.

cnihtwīse f. _boyishness_.

cnissan = cnyssan

cnītian _to dispute_, #Sc# 51^12.

cnittan = cnyttan

cnocian = cnucian

±cnōdan (ēo) _to attribute to, assign to, load with_, CP.

cnoll m. ‘_knoll_,’ _Ps_; Mdf: _summit_, _Æ, Bo_.

cnop ‘_ballationes_,’ WW 8^28; 357^32.

-cnoppa v. wull-c.

+cnos n. _collision_, WW 376^2. [cnyssan]

cnōsl n. _stock, progeny, kin, family_: _native country_.

cnossian _to strike, hit upon_, #Seaf# 8.

cnotmǣlum ‘_strictim_,’ A 13·35^201.

cnotta m. _‘knot,’ fastening_, _Æ_: _knotty point, puzzle_, _Æ_.

±cnucian _to ‘knock’ (door)_, _Æ, Mt_: _beat, pound_, _IM, Lcd_ (o).

cnūian, cnūwian _to pound_.

+cnycc n. _bond_, DR.

±cnyccan pret. 3 sg. cnycte, cnyhte _to tie_.

+cnycled _bent, crooked_, WW 458^33.

cnyht = cniht

cnyll m. _sound or signal of a bell_, _RB, WW_. [‘_knell_’]

±cnyllan _to toll a bell_: _strike, knock_, _LkR, MtL_. [‘_knell_’]

cnyllsian (LkL) = cnyllan

cnyrd- = cneord-

±cnyssan _to press, toss, strike, hew to pieces, dash, crash
(together)_, _beat_, Æ, AO, CP: _overcome, overwhelm, oppress_, CP.

cnyssung f. _striking, stroke_, #ÆGr#.

±cnyttan _to fasten, tie, bind, ‘knit’_ (‘_i-knit_,’ _Mt, WW_), _Æ,
Lcd_; CP. [cnotta]

cnyttels m. _string, sinew_, OEG 2935.

coc = cocc

cōc m. ‘_cook_,’ _Æ, Ps_; CP. [_L._ coquus]

cocc m. _cock, male bird_, _Æ, Lcd, Mt_; CP, Mdf.

coccel m. _‘cockle,’ darnel, tares_, _Mt_.

cocer m. _quiver, case, sheath_: _sword, spear_.

cocerflā f. ‘_framea_,’ #APs# 16^13.

cōcerpanne f. _cooking-pan, frying-pan_.

+cōcnian (cōca-) _to season food_.

cōcnung f. _seasoning_, #Lcd#.

cocor = cocer

cōcormete m. _seasoned food_, WW 281^6.

+cōcsian _to cook, roast_, #RPs# 101^4.

cōcunung = cōcnung

cocur (Æ) = cocer

codd m. _‘cod,’ husk_, _Lcd_: _bag_, _Mt_: _scrotum_.

coddæppel m. _quince_, WW 411^15.

codic (coydic) _‘lapsana,’ charlock_? A 37·47.

coe- = ce-

cōe- (N) = cē-

cofa m. _closet, chamber_: _ark_: _cave, den_. [‘_cove_’]

cofgodas mp. _household gods_, #Gl#.

cofincel n. _little chamber_, WW.

-cofrian v. ā-c.

cohhetan _to make a noise, cough_? #Jud# 270.

col n., nap. colu, cola _‘coal,’ live coal_, _Æ, CP, Lcd, VPs_.

cōl I. _‘cool,’ cold_, _B, Bo, Lcd_: _tranquil, calm_. II. pret. 3 sg.
of calan.

-colc v. ōden-, wīn-c.

cōlcwyld f. _‘frigida pestis,’ ague_? WW 243^11.

cōlian _to ‘cool,’ grow cold, be cold_, _An, Gu, Lcd_.

coliandre f. _coriander_, #Lcd#.

cōll = cōl

-colla v. morgen-c.

collecta f. _collect_, CM, LL.

+collenferhtan _to make empty, exhaust_.

collen-ferhð, -fyrhð, -ferð † _proud, elated, bold_. [*cwellan
(_to swell_)?]

colloncrog m. _water-lily, nymphæa_.

colmāse f. _‘coal-mouse,’ tit-mouse_, _WW_.

cōlnes f. ‘_coolness_,’ _Ps_.

colpytt m. _(char-)coal pit_, Ct.

colsweart _coal-black_, NC 277.

colt m. ‘_colt_,’ _Æ_.

coltetræppe f. _a plant, ‘caltrop,’_ _WW_.

coltgræg f? _colt’s-foot_, WW 136^18.

coltræppe = coltetræppe

col-ðrǣd, -ðrēd m. _plumb-line_, #Gl#.

columne f. _column_.

cōm pret. 3 sg. of cuman.

coman (AO 70^24) = cuman

comb = camb

combol = cumbol

comēta m. _comet_, †#Chr# 975. [_L._]

commuc = cammoc

cōmon pret. pl. of cuman.

comp == camp

con = can pres. 1, 3 sg. of cunnan.

condel = candel

conn = cann pres. 1, 3 sg. of cunnan.

consolde f. _comfrey_. [_L._]

const = canst pres. 2 sg. of cunnan.

consul m. _consul_, AO. [_L._]

coorte f. _cohort_, AO. [_L._]

cop = copp

cōp m? _‘ependytes,’ cope, vestment_.

+cōp _proper, fitting_, CP.

copel _unsteady, rocking_? (BT), BC 3·624.

cōpenere m. _lover_, CP.

coper, copor n. ‘_copper_,’ _Lcd_. [_L._ cuprum]

copian _to plunder, steal_, WW 379^17.

+cōplic _proper, fitting_. adv. -līce.

copp I. m. _top, summit_, _HGl_. [‘_cop_’] II. m. _cup_, _NG_. [‘_cop_’]

-coppe v. ātor-c.

copped _polled, lopped, pollard_, Ct.

cops (_WW_) == cosp

+cor n. _decision_. [cēosan]

corcīð m. _increase_? _choice growth_? #Lcd# 3·212^9 (v. A 31·56).

cordewānere m. _‘cordwainer,’ shoemaker_, _EC_. [_OFr._]

±coren (pp. of cēosan) _chosen, elect, choice, fit_, Æ: _precious,
dear_.

corenbēg m. _crown_, A 9·172. [_L._ corona]

±corenes f. _choice, election_: (+) _goodness_.

+corenlic _elegant_. adv. -līce, WW.

±corenscipe m. _election, excellence_.

corfen pp. of ceorfan.

corflian _to mince_. [ceorfan]

corn n. _‘corn,’ grain_, _Chr, CP_; Æ, AO: _seed, berry_, _CP, Jn, Lcd_;
Æ: _a corn-like pimple, corn_.

cornæsceda fp. _chaff_, WW 118^1.

cornappla np. _pomegranates_, OEG.

corn-bǣre, -berende _corn-bearing_.

corngebrot n. _corn dropped in carrying to barn_, LL 451[17].

corngesǣlig _rich in corn_, #Lcd#.

corngesceot n. _payment in corn_, Ct.

cornhūs n. _granary_, WW 185^28.

cornhwicce f. _corn-bin_, Æ.

cornlād f. _leading of corn_, LL 453[21,4].

cornsǣd n. _a grain of corn_, GD 253^1.

corntēoðung f. _tithe of corn_, W.

corntrēow n. _cornel-tree_, WW.

corntrog m. _corn-bin_, WW 107^1.

cornuc, cornuch = cranoc

cornwurma m. _scarlet dye_, #Gl#.

corōna m. _crown_. [_L._]

+corōnian _to crown_, #PPs# 5^13.

corsnǣd f. _piece of consecrated bread which an accused person swallowed
as a test of innocence_, LL.

corðor †, corðer † fn. _troop, band, multitude, throng, retinue_:
_pomp_.

corwurma = cornwurma

cos = coss

cosp m. _fetter, bond_, _Bo_. [‘_cops_’]

+cospende, +cosped _fettered_, #LPs#.

coss m. _‘kiss,’ embrace_, _Æ, Lk, WW_.

cossetung f. _kissing_, NG.

cossian _to ‘kiss,’_ _Æ_.

cost I. m. _option, choice, possibility_: _manner, way_, _DR_:
_condition_. ðæs costes ðe _on condition that_. [‘_cost_’; v. NC 341]
II. (±) †_tried, chosen, excellent_. [cēosan] III. m? _costmary, tansy_,
_Lcd_. [‘_cost_’]

costere I. m? _spade, shovel_, WW 106^18. II. = costnere

±costian (w. g. or a., also intr.) _to tempt, try, prove, examine_, AO,
CP. [_Ger._ kosten]

costigend m. _tempter_.

costnere m. _tempter_, Æ.

+costnes f. _proving, temptation, trial_, BH 218^10.

costnian = costian

costnigend = costigend

costnungstōw f. _place of temptation_.

±costung, costnung f. _temptation, testing, trial, tribulation_, _Mt_;
Æ, CP. [‘_costnung_’]

cot (AO) n. (nap. cotu); cote f. _‘cot,’ cottage, bedchamber, den_, _AO,
Lk, Mt_; Mdf.

cotesetla = cotsetla

cotlīf n. _hamlet, village, manor_, _Chr_: _dwelling_. [‘_cotlif_’]

cotsetla m. _cottager_, _LL_. [‘_cotsetla_’]

cott = cot

cottuc, cotuc m. _mallow_, #Gl#.

coða m., coðe f. = coðu

coðig _diseased_.

coðlīce _ill, miserably_, #Met# 25^36.

cōðon (AO) = cūðon pret. pl. of cunnan.

coðu f. _disease, sickness_, _Æ, Chr, Lcd_. [‘_cothe_’]

+cow n. _thing to be chewed, food_, NC 292.

cowen pp. of cēowan.

crā n? _croaking_, WW 208^10.

crabba m. ‘_crab_,’ _WW_: _Cancer (sign of the zodiac)_, _Lcd_.

cracelung? ‘_crepacula_,’ OEG 56^249.

crācettan = crǣcettan

cracian _to resound, ‘crack,’_ _Ps_.

cradol, cradel m. _‘cradle,’ cot_, _WW_.

cradolcild n. _child in the cradle, infant_, W 158^14.

crǣ = crāwe  [[under “crāwa”]]

crǣcettan _to croak_, GD 118^25. [crā]

crǣcetung f. _croaking_.

cræf- = craf-

cræft m. _physical strength, might, courage_, _A, AO, Sol_: _science,
skill, art, ability, talent, virtue, excellence_, _Bo_; Æ, CP: _trade,
handicraft, calling_, _BH, CP, RB_; Æ: _work or product of art_, _Hex_:
_trick, fraud, deceit_, #Bl#: _machine, instrument_. [‘_craft_’]

cræfta = cræftiga

±cræftan _to exercise a craft, build_: _bring about, contrive_, Æ.

cræftelīce = cræftlīce

+cræftgian _to strengthen, render powerful_, AO.

cræftglēaw _skilful, wise_, †#Chr# 975.

cræf-t(i)ca, -t(e)ga = cræftiga

cræftig _strong, powerful_, _AO_: _skilful, cunning, ingenious_, _Bl_:
_learned, instructive_, A 8·321: _knowing a craft, scientific_:
_virtuous_. [‘_crafty_’]

cræftiga m. _craftsman, artificer, workman, architect_, Æ, CP.

cræftiglīce _skilfully_.

cræftlēas _artless, unskilful_.

cræftlic _artificial_, A 8·317: _skilful_. adv. -līce.

cræftwyrc n. _clever workmanship_.

cræt n. nap. cratu, creatu _cart, waggon, chariot_, Æ.

crætehors n. _cart-horse_, WW 108^24.

crætwǣn m. _chariot_, AO.

crætwīsa m. _charioteer_, ÆL 18^295.

crǣwð pres. 3 sg. of crāwan.

crafian (æ) _to ‘crave,’ ask, implore, demand_, _Chr, LL_: _summon_,
_Lcd_.

crafing (æ) f. _claim, demand_, TC 644.

±crammian _to ‘cram,’ stuff_, _ÆGr_.

crammingpohha m. ‘_viscarium_,’ NC.

crampul m. _crane-pool_. [= cran, pōl]

cran m. ‘_crane_,’ _WW_.

crancstæf m. _weaving implement, crank_, LL 455[15].

crang pret. 3 sg. of cringan.

cranic m. _record, chronicle_. [_L._]

cranicwrītere m. _chronicler_, OEG 7^24.

cranoc m. _crane_. [_Ger._ kranich]

crās f. _food, dainty_, #Nar# 11^14.

crat (WW 140^31) = cræt

cratu v. cræt.

crāwa m., crāwe f. _‘crow,’ raven_, _Gl, Ps_.

±crāwan^7 _to ‘crow,’_ _Mt_; CP.

crāwan-lēac (crāw-) n. _crow-garlic_.

crēac- = crēc-

crēad pret. 3 sg. of crūdan.

creaft- = cræft-

crēap pret. 3 sg, of crēopan.

crēas _fine, elegant_, NC 277.

crēaslic _dainty, rich_. v. NC 277.

crēasnes f. _elegance_: _presumption, elation_, OEG 1108.

creat = cræt

Crēcas mp. _the ‘Greeks,’_ _AO, BH_.

Crēce = Crēcas

Crēcisc _Grecian, Greek_, AO.

crēda m. _creed, belief, confession of faith_, Æ. [_L._ credo]

credic? _a bowl_, OEG 29^3.

creft (AS) == cræft

crencestre f. _female weaver, spinster_. [cranc]
  [[only in compound “crancstæf”]]

±crēopan^2 (occly. refl.) _to creep, crawl_, _Æ, Bo_; AO, CP.

creopel = crypel

crēopere m. _cripple_. [‘_creeper_’]

crēopung f. ‘_creeping_,’ _Gl_.

crēow pret. 3 sg. of crāwan.

crepel = crypel

cressa m. (#Gl#), cresse f. = cærse

cribb (y) f. _‘crib,’ stall_, _Cr_ 1426.

cricc = crycc

crīde pret. 3 sg. of crīgan.

crīgan? _to bubble up_. v. OEG 7·101.

±crimman^3 _to cram, put in, insert_: _crumble_.

crinc ‘_cothurnus_,’ ZDA 33·250^2.

crincan = cringan

cring (gr-) _downfall, slaughter_. #El# 115.

±cringan^3 _to yield, fall (in battle)_, _die_.

cringwracu (gr-) f. _torment_, #Jul# 265.

crippan = cryppan

crīpð pres. 3 sg of crēopan.

crisma m. _chrism, holy oil_: _chrisome-cloth_: _anointing_.

crismal m? n? _chrismale_, W 36^17.

crismhālgung f. _consecration of the chrism_.

crismlīsing (ȳ^2) f. _chrism-loosing, loosing of the chrismale,
confirmation_, #Chr#.

crisp (_BH_) = cirps [‘_crisp_’]

Crīst m. _anointed one, Christ_, Æ, CP.

cristalla m. _crystal_, Æ.

cristallisc _of crystal_, A 4·143.

crīstelmǣl = crīstesmǣl

crīstelmǣlbēam m. _tree surmounted by a cross_? _upright shaft of a
cross_? EC 385´.

crīsten ‘_Christian_,’ _AO, BH_; Æ. ðā crīstnan = _the English as
opposed to the Danes_, #Chr# 894.

crīsten m. crīst(e)na f. ‘_Christian_,’ _AO_.

crīstendōm m. _‘Christendom,’ the church, Christianity_, _AO_; Æ.

crīstenlic _Christian_, DR.

crīstenmann m. _a Christian_, MH 170^25.

crīstennes f. _Christianity_: _Christian baptism_, LL 412[1]; 413[13a].

crīstes-mǣl (#Chr#), -mēl mn. _(Christ’s mark), the cross_. wyrcan c.
_to make the sign of the cross_.

crīstlic _Christian_, LL.

crīstmæsse f. _Christmas_, #Chr# 1021#d#.

crīstna = crīsten

crīstnere m. _catechist_.

crīstnes = crīstennes

±crīstnian _to anoint with chrism (as a catechumen)_, _‘christen,’
baptize, catechize_, _BH_.

crīstnung f. _christening, anointing with chrism or holy oil_, W 33^16.

crīð = crīgeð (v. crīgan)?

crocc f., crocca m. _‘crock,’ pot, vessel_, _Lcd_.

crocchwer? m. _earthen pot_, OEG 4672.

crōced = crōged

+crōcod _crooked, bent_, NC 292.

crocsceard n. _potsherd_, Æ.

crocwyrhta m. _potter_, #ÆGr#.

+crod n. _crowd, throng_.

croden pp. of crūdan.

croft m. _croft, small field_.

crōg m. _crock, pitcher, vessel_, #Gl#.

crōgcynn n. _kind of vessel, wine-jar_, WW 210^39.

+crōged (ōc) ‘_croceus, coccineus_,’ OEG 5204.

croh m. _saffron_.

crōh I. m. _shoot, twig, tendril_. II. = crōg

crohha = crocca  [[under “crocc”]]

croma = cruma

crompeht _‘placenta,’ a flat cake_, ES 42·174; A 37·48.

crong = crang, pret. 3 sg. of cringan.

crop = cropp

cropen pp. of crēopan.

crop-lēac, -lēc n. _garlic_.

cropp, croppa m. _cluster, bunch_: _sprout, flower, berry, ear of corn_,
_Ep, LkL, WW_: _‘crop’ (of a bird)_, _Æ_: _kidney_; _pebble_.

croppiht _clustered_, #Lcd# 38b.

crūc m. _cross_, _Lcd_, LV 74. [‘_crouch_’]

crūce f. _pot, pitcher_, #Gl#.

crucethūs n. _torture-chamber_, #Chr# 1137.

crūdan^2 † _to press, hasten, drive_.

cruft m? crufte f. _crypt_. [_L._]

cruma (o) m. _‘crumb,’ fragment_, _Mt, WW_.

crumb, crump _crooked, bent, stooping_, _Gl_. [‘_crump_’; _Ger._ krumm]

crumen (crumm-) pp. of crimman.

cruncon pret. pl. of crincan.

crundel mn. _ravine_, Mdf.

crungen pp. of cringan.

crupon pret. pl. of crēopan.

crūse f? _cruse_, A 37·50.

crūsene, crūsne f. _fur coat_, #Gl#. [cp. _Ger._ kürschner]

crybb = cribb

crycc f. _‘crutch,’ staff_, _BH_; Æ.

cryccen _made of clay_, GPH 398.

crȳdeð pres. 3 sg. of crūdan.

crymbing f. _curvature, bend, inclination_, WW 382^2. [crumb]

+crymian, +crymman (tr.) _to crumble_.

+crympan _to curl_.

crypel I. m. ‘_cripple_,’ _LkL_. II. _crippled_. III. m. _narrow
passage, burrow, drain_, OEG; v. Mdf.

crypelgeat n. _narrow opening in a wall or fence_? BC 2·399^1.

crypelnes f. _paralysis_.

crȳpeð, crȳpð pres. 3 sg. of crēopan.

±cryppan _to crook (finger)_, _close (hand)_, _bend_.

cryps = cirps

crysm- = crism-

crȳt = crȳdeð pres. 3 sg. of crūdan.

cū f. gs. cū(e), cȳ, cūs; ds. cȳ; nap. cȳ, cȳe; gp. cū(n)a, cȳna; dp.
cūm; ‘_cow_,’ _Æ, Lk, VPs_; Mdf.

cūbutere f. _butter_, #Lcd#. [cū]

cūbȳre m. _cow-byre, cow-shed_, Ct.

cuc == cwic

cūcealf (æ) n. _calf_, _Erf, LL_. [‘_cowcalf_’]

cuceler, cuce(le)re = cucler(e)

cucelere ‘_capo_,’ WW 380^25.

cucler, cuculer, cuclere m. _spoon, spoonful_. [cp. _L._ cochlear]

cuclermǣl n. _spoonful_, #Lcd#.

cucu (Æ, AO, CP) v. cwic.

cucurbite f. _gourd_, #Lcd# 92a. [_L._]

cudele f. _cuttlefish_, WW 181^7.

cudu (Æ) = cwudu

cūēage f. _eye of a cow_, LL 116#b#n.

cueðan = cweðan

cufel f. _‘cowl,’ hood_ (v. NED 2 p. viii).

cūfel = cȳfl

cufle, cuffie = cufel

cugle, cug(e)le, cuhle f. _cap_, _‘cowl,’ hood, head-covering_, _RB_
(v. ‘_cowl_’).

cūhorn m. _cow’s horn_, LL 116.

cūhyrde m. _cowherd_.

cūle = cugle

culfer, cul(e)fre f. _‘culver,’ pigeon, dove_, _Gen, VPs, WW_.

culmille f. _small centaury_, #Lcd# 22a.

culpan as. of *culpa? m. or *culpe? f. _fault, sin_, #Cr# 177.

culpian _to humble oneself, cringe_, #Bo# 71^24.

culter m. ‘_coulter_,’ _WW_: _dagger, knife_, _WW_. [_L._ culter]

culufre = culfre  [[under “culfer”]]

cūm v. cū.

cuma mf. _stranger, guest_, Æ, AO, CP. cumena hūs, inn, wīcung _inn,
guestchamber_.

cuman^4 _to ‘come,’ approach, get to, attain_, _Lk, VPs_; Æ, AO, CP.
c. ūp _land, be born_: (±) _go, depart_, Æ, AO: _come to oneself,
recover_: _become_: _happen_ (also c. forð): _put_: (+)_come together,
arrive, assemble_, Æ: (†) w. inf. of verbs of motion, forming a sort of
periphrastic conjugation for such verbs. cōm gangan _he came_. cōm
swimman _he swam_, _etc._

cumb I. m. _valley_, _BC_; Mdf. [‘_coomb_’] II. m. _liquid measure_,
_BC_. [v. ‘_comb_’]

cumbelgehnād = cumbolgehnāst  [[under “cumbolgebrec”]]

cumbl = (1) cumbol; (2) cumul

cumbol † n. _sign, standard, banner_.

cumbolgebrec ‡, -gehnāst ‡ n. _crash of banners, battle_.

cumbolhaga m. _compact rank, phalanx_, #Jul# 395.

cumbolhete m. _warlike hate_, #Jul# 637.

cumbolwīga † m. _warrior_.

cumbor, cumbul == cumbol

cumen pp. of cuman.

cumendre f. _godmother_. [*cumædre A 37·52]

cūmeoluc f. _cow’s milk_, #Lcd# 15a.

Cumere? -eras? np. _Cumbrians_, Æ.

cumfeorm f. _entertainment for travellers_, Ct. [cuma, feorm]

cū-micge f. -migoða m. _cow’s urine_, #Lcd#.

cuml = cumbl

cumlīðe _hospitable_. [cuma]

cumlīðian _to be a guest_.

cumlīðnes f. _hospitality_, Æ: _sojourn as guest_.

cummāse f. _a kind of bird, ‘parra,’_ WW 260^19.

cumpæder m. _godfather_, #Chr# 894#a#. [_L._ compater]

cumul, cuml n. _swelling_, #Lcd# 1·60.

cūna v. cū.

cund == cynd

-cund adjectival suffix denoting derivation, origin or likeness. (-kind)
as in deofol-cund, god-cund.

cuneglæsse f. _hound’s tongue_, #Lcd# 41b. [_L._ cynoglossum]

cunele, cunelle, cunille f. _wild thyme_. [_Ger._ quendel]

cuning = cyning

±cunnan pres. 1 and 3 sg. can(n), pl. cunnon; pret. cūðe, pp. cūð swv.
_to be or become acquainted with, be thoroughly conversant with, know_,
_AO, B, Lcd_; CP, Æ: _know how to, have power to, be able to, can_, Æ,
CP: _express (thanks)_, _Chr_ 1092. [‘_can_,’ ‘_con_’]

cunnere m. _tempter_, NG.

±cunnian (w. g. or a.) _to search into, try, test, seek for, explore,
investigate_, _B, Bo, Sol_; Æ, CP: _experience_: _have experience of, to
make trial of_. [‘_cun_’]

cunnung f. _knowledge_: _trial, probation, experience_.

cuopel f? _small boat_, _MtL_. [‘_coble_’]

cuppe f. ‘_cup_,’ _Lcd, WW_; Æ.

curfon pret. pl. of ceorfan.

curmealle (e, i) f. _centaury_.

curnstān = cweornstān

curon pret. pl. of cēosan.

curs m. _malediction, ‘curse,’_ _Ct, LL, Sc_.

cursian I. _to ‘curse,’_ _Ps_. II. _to plait_? MkR 15^17.

cursumbor _incense_, MtL 2^11.

cursung f. _‘cursing,’ damnation_, _LkL_: _place of torment_, _MtL_.

cūs v. cū.

cūsc _chaste, modest, virtuous_, #Gen# 618. [_Ger._ keusch]

cūscote (eo, u) f. _‘cushat’ dove, wood-pigeon_, _Gl_.

cūself f. _cow’s fat, suet_, GPH 392. [sealf]

cū-sloppe, -slyppe f. ‘_cowslip_,’ _Lcd, WW_.

cūsnes = cīsnes

cūtægl m. _tail of a cow_, LL 169[59#b#].

cūð _known, plain, manifest, certain_, _Da, Ps, Rd_; Æ, AO, CP: _well
known, usual_: _noted, excellent, famous_, _Ex_: _intimate, familiar,
friendly, related_. [‘_couth_’]

cūða m. _acquaintance, relative_, CP.

cūðe I. _clearly, plainly_. [‘_couth_’] II. pret. 3 sg. of cunnan.

cūðelic = cūðlic

cūðian _to become known_.

cūðice = cūðlīce

±cūðlǣcan _to make known_: _make friends with_, ÆL.

cūðlic _known, certain, evident_. adv. -līce _clearly, evidently,
certainly, openly_, _BH_; CP, Æ: _familiarly, kindly, affably_, _An,
BH_; Æ: _therefore, to be sure, hence_.

cūðnes f. _acquaintance, knowledge_.

cūðnoma m. _surname_, NG.

cūðon pret. pl. of cunnan.

cūwearm _warm from the cow (milk)_, #Lcd# 126a.

cuwon pret. pl. of cēowan.

cwacian _to ‘quake,’ tremble, chatter (of teeth)_, _Æ, AO, Cr, LkL,
VPs_.

cwacung f. _‘quaking,’ trembling_, _Æ, VPs_; AO.

cwæc- = cwac-

cwǣdon pret. pl. of cweðan.

cwæl pret. 3 sg., cwǣlon pret. pl., of cwelan.

cwæl- = cwal-, cwiel-, cwil-

cwǣman = cwēman

cwǣn = cwēn

cwærtern = cweartern

cwæð pret. 3 sg. of cweðan.

cwal- = cweal-

cwalstōw (LL 556[10,2]) = cwealmstōw

cwalu f. _killing, murder, violent death, destruction_, Æ, CP. [cwelan]

cwānian † (tr. and intr.) _to lament, bewail, deplore, mourn_. [_Goth._
kwainon]

cwānig _sad, sorrowful_, #El# 377.

cwānung f. _lamentation_, NC 279.

cwartern = cweartern

cwatern _the number four at dice_, #Gl#. [_L._]

cwēad n. _dung, dirt, filth_. [_Ger._ kot]

cweaht pp. of cweccan.

cweald pp. of cwellan.

cwealm (e) mn. _death, murder, slaughter_: _torment, pain_: _plague,
pestilence_, _ÆH_; AO. [‘_qualm_’; cwelan]

+cwealmbǣran _to torture_.

cwealmbǣre _deadly, murderous, bloodthirsty_, Æ.

cwealmbǣrnes (e) f. _mortality, destruction, ruin_, Æ.

cwealmbealu n. _death_, B 1940.

cwealmberendlic (y^1) _pestilent, deadly_, NC 279.

cwealmcuma m. _death-bringer_, B 792.

cwealmdrēor m. _blood shed in death_, #Gen# 985.

+cwealmful (y^1) _pernicious_, #HGl# 428.

cwealmnes f. _pain, torment_, BH.

cwealmstede m. _death-place_.

cwealmstōw f. _place of execution_, BH 38^6 (#b#).

cwealmðrēa m. _deadly terror_, #Gen# 2507.

cwearn = cweornstān

cweartern (a, æ, e) n. _prison_, Æ.

cwearternlic _of a prison_.

±cweccan _to shake, swing, move, vibrate_, _Mt, VPs_; Æ. [‘_quetch_’;
cwacian]

cweccung f. _moving, shaking, wagging_.

cwecesand m. _quicksand_, WW 357^6.

+cwed n. _declaration_, WW 423^22.

cweddian = cwiddian

cwedel = cwedol

cweden pp. of cweðan.

+cwedfæsten f. _appointed fast_, A 11·99; ES 43·162.

+cwednes f. _name_, #HGl# 441.

cwedol _talkative, eloquent_.

+cwedrǣden (i, y) f. _agreement_, AO: _conspiracy_.

+cwedrædnes (y) f. _agreement, covenant_, NC 292.

+cwedstōw f. _appointed place, place of meeting_, GD 183^7.

cwehte pret. sg. of cweccan.

cwelan^4 _to die_, Æ, CP.

cweldeht _corrupted, mortified_, #Lcd# 47b. [= *cwildeht]

cwelderǣde (æ^1)? _evening rider_? _bat_, #Shr# 29^8. [_ON._ kveld]

±cwellan _to kill, murder, execute_, _CP_; Æ, AO. [‘_quell_’]

cwellend m. _killer, slayer_, GPH 400.

cwellere m. _murderer, executioner_, _BH, Mk_; Æ. [‘_queller_’]

cwelm = cwealm (but v. MFH 106), cwielm-

cwelmere, cwelre = cwellere

±cwēman (w. d.) _to gratify, please, satisfy, propitiate_, _Æ, AO, CP_:
_comply with, be obedient to, serve_. [‘_queme_’; ‘_i-queme_’]

±cwēme _pleasant, agreeable, acceptable_, _NG, WG_. [‘_i-queme_’]

cwēme- = cwēm-

cwēmed- = cwēm-

±cwēming f. _pleasing, satisfaction, complaisance_, CP.

cwēmlic _pleasing, satisfying_, DR. adv. -līce _graciously, kindly,
humbly_.

±cwēmnes f. _pleasure, satisfaction, mitigation_.

cwēn (ǣ) f. _woman_, _Sc_; Æ: _wife, consort_, _AO, Chr, Gen_: _‘queen,’
empress, royal princess_, _Æ, AO, Chr, Cr, VPs_. [_Goth._ kwēns]

cwene f. _woman_, _Rd, W_: _female serf_, _‘quean,’ prostitute_, AO.
[_Goth._ kwinō]

cwenfugol _hen-bird_.

cwēnhirde m. _eunuch_, MtL 19^12.

cwēnlic _womanly_? _queenly_? B 1940.

cweodu = cwudu

cweorn f. _‘quern,’ handmill, mill_, _MtL_; CP.

cweornbill _‘lapidaria,’ a stone chisel for dressing querns_ (BT), WW
438^18.

cweornburna m. _mill-stream_, Ct.

cweorne = cweorn

cweornstān m. _mill-stone_, _Mt_. [‘_quernstone_’]

cweorntēð mp. _molars, grinders_, #Gl#.

-cweorra v. mete-c.

-cweorran v. ā-c.

cweorð _name of the rune for =cw= (=q=)_.

cwern (NG) == cweorn

cwertern = cweartern

±cweðan^6 _to say, speak, name, call, proclaim, summon, declare_, _Bl,
VPs_; Æ, AO, CP: (+) _order, give orders_: ± c. (tō) _agree, settle,
resolve_: (+) _consider, regard_, ÆL 1^117. c. on hwone _assign to one_.
cwyst ðū lā _sayest thou?_ ‘_numquid_.’ cweðe gē _think you?_
[‘_quethe_’]

cwic [cuc, cucu (this last form is archaic, and has an occasional asm.
cucone, cucune)] _‘quick,’ living, alive_, _BH, Bl, Bo, CP, Lcd_; AO.

cwicǣht f. _live stock_, LL 60[18,1].

cwicbēam m. _aspen, juniper_, _Gl, Lcd_. [‘_quick-beam_’]

cwicbeamen _of aspen_, #Lcd#.

cwicbēamrind f. _aspen bark_, #Lcd#.

cwiccliende _moving rapidly_? _tottering_? OEG 2234.

cwice fm. _‘couch’ (‘quitch’)-grass_, _Gl, Lcd_.

cwicfȳr n. _sulphur_, LkR 17^29.

cwichrērende _living and moving_, #Creat# 5.

±cwician _to quicken, create_, _JnL_: _come to life, come to one’s
self_, _Æ, Lcd_. [‘_quick_’]

cwiclāc n. _a living sacrifice_, NG.

cwiclic _living, vital_, DR. adv. -līce _vigorously_.

cwiclifigende † _living_.

cwicrind = cwicbēamrind

cwicseolfor n. ‘_quicksilver_,’ _Lcd_.

cwicsūsl nf. _hell torment, punishment, torture_, Æ.

cwicsūslen _purgatorial_, #ApT# 26.

cwictrēow n. _aspen_, WW.

cwicu == cwic

+cwicung f. _restoration to life_, GD 218^17.

cwicwelle _living (of water)_, JnR.

cwid- = cwed-, cwud-

cwidbōc f. _Book of Proverbs_, CP: _book of homilies_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

cwiddian (e, y) _to talk, speak, say, discuss, report_: _make a claim
against_, LL 400[3,1].

cwiddung (y) f. _speech, saying, report_, Æ.

cwide (y) m. _speech, saying, word, sentence, phrase, proverb, argument,
proposal, discourse, homily_, _Bo_; Æ, CP: _testament, will, enactment,
decree, decision, judgment_, _TC_; Æ. [‘_quide_’; cweðan]

+cwide n. _sentence, decree, fate_.

cwidegiedd (i) n. _speech, song_, #Wa# 55.

cwidelēas _speechless_, Æ (y): _intestate_, EC 212.

cwielman (æ, e, i, y) _to torment, afflict, mortify, destroy, kill_,
_Bl, VPs_; AO, CP. [‘_quelm_’] For compounds v. cwylm-.

cwiferlīce _zealously_, RB 122^2.

cwild (y) mfn. _destruction, death, pestilence, murrain_. [cwelan]

cwildbǣre _deadly, dangerous, pestiferous_. adv. -bǣrlīce.

cwildberendlic (y) _deadly_, NC 279.

cwildeflōd nm. _deluge_, #CPs# 28^10.

±cwildful (y) _deadly_, OEG.

cwildrōf _deadly, savage_, #Ex# 166.

cwilman = cwielman

cwilð pres. 3 sg. of cwelan.

-cwīnan v. ā-c.

-cwincan v. ā-c.

cwine = cwene

+cwis _conspiracy_, OEG 4955.

-cwisse v. un-c.

cwist pres. 2 sg. of cweðan.

cwið I. (also cwiða) m. _belly, womb_. [_Goth._ kwiðus] II. pres. 3 sg.
of cweðan.

cwīðan _to bewail_: _accuse_, LL.

cwiðe = cwide

cwiðenlic _natural_, WW 412^30.

cwīðnes f. _complaint, lament_, GD.

cwiðst pres. 2 sg. of cweðan.

cwīðung (qu-) f. _complaint_, WW 488^37.

cwolen pp. of cwelan.

-cwolstan v. for-c.

cwōm pret. 3 sg. of cuman.

cwuc, cwucu = cwic

cwudu (eo, i) n. _what is chewed, cud_, Æ: _resin of trees_. hwīt c.
_chewing gum, mastic_.

cwyc == cwic

cwyd- = cwed-, cwid-, cwidd-

cwydele f. _pustule, tumour, boil_.

cwyld == cwild

cwyldseten f. _first hours of night_, #Gl#.

cwyldtīd m. _evening_, WW. [_ON._ kveld]

cwylla m. _well, spring_, KC 2·265^30. [_Ger._ quelle]

cwylm = cwealm

cwylm- = cwielm-

  [[Printed on one line:
  cwylm = cwealm, cwielm-]]

cwylmend m. _tormentor, destroyer_, GD.

cwylmende _excruciating, deadly_.

+cwylmful _pernicious_, #HGl# 428.

cwylmian (intr.) _to suffer_: (tr.) _torment, kill, crucify_, Æ.
[cwealm]

cwylming f. _suffering, tribulation_, Æ: (metaph.) _cross_: _death_.

cwylmnes f. _pain, torment_.

cwylseten = cwyldseten

cwyltīd = cwyldtīd

cwylð pres. 3 sg. of cwelan.

cwyne = cwene

cwyrn == cweorn

±cwȳsan _to squeeze, dash against, bruise_, Æ.

cwyst pres. 2 sg. of cweðan.

cwyð pres. 3 sg. of cweðan.

cwȳðan = cwīðan

cwyðe = cwide

cwyðst pres. 2 sg. of cweðan.

cȳ v. cū.

cycel (i) m. _small cake_, #Gl#.

cycen = cicen

cycene f. ‘_kitchen_,’ _Æ, WW_. [_L._ coquina]

cycenðēnung f. _service in the kitchen_, NC 279.

cycgel m. ‘_cudgel_,’ _BDS, CP_.

cȳdde pret. 3 sg. of cȳðan.

cȳdung = cīdung

cȳe I. v. cū. II. = cēo

cȳf f. _tub, vat, cask, bushel_, _Æ_. [‘_keeve_’]

cyfes == ciefes

cȳfl m. _tub, bucket_.

cȳgan = cīegan

cȳgling = cȳðling

+cygd = +cīd

+cȳgednes = +cīgednes

cylcan ‘_ructare_,’ OEG 20^2.

cyld = (1) cild; (2) ceald

cyldfaru f. _carrying of children_, Æ.

cyle == ciele

cylen f. _‘kiln,’ oven_, _Cp, WW_.

cyleðenie = celeðonie

cylew = cylu

cylin = cylen

cyll f. _skin, leather bottle, flagon, vessel, censer_, Æ, AO, CP.

cylle I. mf. = cyll. II. = cielle

cyllfylling f. _act of filling a bottle_, GD 250^27.

cyln = cylen

cylu _spotted, speckled_, WW 163^29.

cym imperat. of cuman.

cymbala = cimbala  [[under “cimbal”]]

cyme (i) m. _coming, arrival, advent, approach_, _Bo, MtR_; AO, CP.
[‘_come_’]

cȳme (ī) _comely, lovely, glorious, splendid_.

cymed n. _germander_, #Lcd#.

cymen I. mn. ‘_cumin_,’ _CP, Mt_. [_L._] II. pp. of cuman. III. (and
cymin) = cinimin

  [[Referenced word could not be identified.]]

cȳmlic † _‘comely,’ lovely, splendid_, _Ps_. adv. -līce, _B_.

cȳmnes f. _fastidiousness, daintiness_, #Gl#.

cymst pres. 2 sg., cym(e)ð pres. 3 sg. of cuman.

cyn = (1) cynn; (2) cinn

cȳna gp. of cū.

cyncan as. of sb. _small bundle, bunch_? (BT) #Lcd# 2·58^22.

±cynd (usu.+) nf. _nature, ‘kind,’ (‘i-cunde’) property, quality_, _Bl,
Gu, Met_: _character_, _Bo_: _gender_, _Ph_: (+) _race, species_, _Bl,
Bo, El_: (+) _origin, generation, birth_, +_Hy_: (+) _offspring_: (+)
‘_genitalia_,’ Æ.

+cyndbōc f. _book of Genesis_.

+cynde _natural, native, innate_, _B, Bo, WW_; Æ, AO, CP: _proper,
fitting_, _Met_: _lawful, rightful_, _Chr, Met_. [‘_kind_,’ ‘_i-cunde_’]

cyndelic _‘kindly,’ natural, innate_, _Bo, Lcd_: _generative, of
generation_, LL 7[64]: _proper, suitable_, _Bo_: _lawful_, _BH_. adv.
-līce, _Bo_.

+cyndlim n. _womb_: pl. ‘_genitalia_.’

+cyndnes f. _nation_: _produce, increase_, RHy 6^22.

+cynd-o, -u f. = cynd

cyne = cine II.

cȳne = cēne

cynebænd m. _diadem_, NC 279.

cynebeald † _royally bold, very brave_.

cynebearn (a^3) n. _royal child, Christ_.

cyneboren _royally born_, Æ.

cynebōt f. _king’s compensation_, LL.

cynebotl n. _palace_, Æ.

cynecynn n. _royal race, pedigree or family_, Æ, AO.

cynedōm (cyning-, _Da_) m. _royal dignity, kingly rule, government_,
_Chr, Gl_; AO: _royal ordinance or law_: _‘kingdom’ (‘kindom’), royal
possessions_.

cyneg = cyning

cyne-geard, -gerd = cynegyrd

cynegewǣdu np. _royal robes_, BH 32^25.

cynegierela m. _royal robe_, #Met# 25^23 (e^3).

cynegild n. _king’s compensation_, LL 462.

cynegōd † _noble, well-born, excellent_.

cynegold † n. _regal gold, crown_.

cyne-gyrd, -ge(a)rd f. _sceptre_, Æ.

cynehād m. _kingly honour, state, or dignity_, CP.

cynehām m. _royal manor_, EC.

cyne-helm, -healm m. _diadem, royal crown_, Æ: _royal power_.

cynehelmian _to crown_, ZDA 20·37.

cynehlāford m. _liege lord, king_.

cynehof n. _king’s palace_, GPH 391.

cynelic I. _kingly, royal_, CP: _public_. adv. -līce. II. = cynlic

cynelicnes f. _kingliness_, BH 194^34.

cynemann m. _royal personage_, NG.

cyneren = cynren

cynerīce (cyning-) n. _rule, sovereignty_, _Chr, Ct_; CP: _region,
nation_, AO. [‘_kinrick_,’ ‘_kingrick_’]

cyneriht n. _royal prerogative_, EC 202^18.

cynerōf † _noble, renowned_.

cynescipe m. _royalty, majesty, kingly power_, Æ.

cynesetl n. _throne, capital city_, AO.

cynestōl m. _throne, royal dwelling, city_, Æ, AO, CP.

cynestrǣt f. _public road_, WW 71^6.

cyneðrymlic _very glorious_, NC 279.

cyneðrymm † m. _royal glory, majesty, power_: _kingly host_, #Da# 706.

cynewāðen [-wāden?] _of royal purple_, TC 538.

cynewīse f. _state, commonwealth_.

cynewiððe f. _royal diadem_, #Gl#.

cyneword n. _fitting word_, #Rd# 44^16. [cynn]

cynewyrðe _noble, kingly_, A 8·308, MF 157.

cyng, cynig == cyning

cyning m. _‘king,’ ruler_, _Bo, Bl, Chr_; Æ, AO, CP: _God, Christ_, _Bl,
OET_: (†) _Satan_.

cyning- = cyne-

cyningǣðe _man entitled to take oath as a king’s thane_, LL 112[54#bh#].

cyninge f. _queen_, #Bl# 13^1.

cyningeswyrt f. _marjoram_, WW 301^17.

cyningfeorm f. _king’s sustenance, provision for the king’s household_.

cyninggenīðla m. _great feud_, #El# 610.

cyninggereordu np. _royal banquet_, WW 411^28.

cynlic _fitting, proper, convenient, becoming, sufficient_. adv. -līce.

cynn I. (i) n. _kind, sort, rank, quality_: _family, generation,
offspring, pedigree, kin, race, people_, _Æ, Bl, CP, Chr_: _gender,
sex_, _Æ, Lcd_: _propriety, etiquette_. II. adj. _becoming, proper,
suitable_, CP.

+cynn = +cynd

cynn- = cenn-

cynnig _noble, of good family_, OEG.

cynnreccenes f. _genealogy_, NG.

cynren, cynrēd (#EPs#) n. _kindred, family, generation, posterity,
stock_, CP: _kind, species_.

cynresu _a generation_, Mt (pref.).

cynryn = cynren

cȳo = cēo

cyp = cypp

cȳp- = cīep-

cȳpa m. I. (also cȳpe) f. _vessel, basket_, _Lk, OEG_. [‘_kipe_’] II.
(ē, ī) m. _chapman, trader, merchant_, Æ.

±cȳpan (ī) _to traffic, buy, sell, barter_. [_Ger._ kaufen]

+cȳpe adj. _for sale_, Æ.

cȳpe- = cēap-, cīepe-

cȳpedæg m. _market day_, OEG.

cȳpend m. _one who sells, merchant_.

cypera m. _spawning salmon_, #Met# 19^12.

cyperen (Æ) = cypren

cypp = cipp

cypren _made of copper, copper_, AO. [copor]  [[under “coper”]]

cypresse f. _cypress_, #Lcd# 3·118^21. [_L._]

cypsan = cyspan

cyr- = cer-, cier-, cir-

cyre m. _choice, free will_, _Æ_. [‘_cure_’]

cyreāð m. _oath sworn by an accused man and by other chosen persons_.
v. LL 2·293.

cyrelīf n. _state of dependence on a lord whom a person has chosen_?:
_person in such a state_ (v. BT and NC 279).

cyren = (1) ceren, (2) cyrn  [[under “cyrin”]]

cyrf m. _cutting, cutting off_, _Æ_: _what is cut off_. [‘_kerf_’]

cyrfæt = cyrfet

cyrfel m. _little stake, peg_, WW 126^18.

cyrfet m. _gourd_. [_Ger._ kürbis]

cyrfð pres. 3 sg. of ceorfan.

cyrige v. wæl-c.

cyrin, cyrn (e) f. ‘_churn_,’ _WW_.

cyrnel (i) mn. (nap. cyrnlu) _seed_, _‘kernel,’ pip_, _Æ, Lcd_:
_(enlarged) gland, swelling_, _Lcd_. [corn]

+cyrnod, +cyrnlod _granulated, rough_, OEG.

cyrps = cirps

cyrriol _the Kyrie Eleeson_, A 8·320.

cyrs- = cærs-, cris-

cyrstrēow n. _cherry-tree_, WW 138. [ciris; _L._]

+cyrtan _to shorten_.

cyrtel m. _(man’s) tunic, coat_, Æ, AO: _(woman’s) gown_, _Ct_.
[‘_kirtle_’]

cyrten I. _fair, comely_, Æ: _intelligent_. adv. -līce (and cyrtelīce)
_elegantly, neatly, fairly, well, exactly_. II. _ornament_? WW 216^7.

cyrtenes (e^1) f. _elegance, beauty_.

±cyrtenlǣcan (e^1) _to beautify, make elegant_, Æ.

cyrð pres. 3 sg. of cyrran.  [[redirected to “cierran”]]

cys- = cyse-, ceos-

cȳs- = cīs-

  [[Printed on one line:
  cys-, cȳs- = cyse-, ceos-, cīs-]]

cȳsefæt n. _cheese vat_, WW 379^27.

cȳsehwǣg n. _whey_, #Lcd# 119b.

cȳsfæt (LL 455^17) = cȳsefæt

cȳsgerunn n. _rennet_.

cysirbēam = cirisbēam

cȳslybb n. _rennet_, _Lcd_. [‘_cheeselip_’]

±cyspan _to fetter, bind_. [cosp]

±cyssan _to ‘kiss,’_ _Æ, BH, Mt_. [coss]

cȳssticce n. _piece of cheese_.

cyst I. fm. _free-will, choice, election_: (w. gp.) _the best of
anything, the choicest_, Æ: _picked host_: _moral excellence, virtue,
goodness_, CP, Æ: _generosity, munificence_, CP. [cēosan] II. = cist I.

cȳst pres. 3 sg. of cēosan.

cystan _to spend, lay out, get the value of_, #Chr# 1124.

cystbēam = cistenbēam

cystel (= cist-) f. _chestnut-tree_.

cystelīce = cystiglīce  [[form of “cystig”]]

cystian (e) _to put in a coffin_, W. [cest]  [[under “cist”]]

cystig _charitable, liberal, generous_, _CP_; Æ: _virtuous, good_.
[‘_custi_’] adv. -līce.

cystignes, cystines f. _liberality, bounty, goodness_, Æ: _abundance_.

cystlēas _worthless, bad_, #Gen# 1004.

cystlic = cystig

cystnes = cystignes

cȳsð = cīesð pres. 3 sg. of cēosan.

cȳswucu f. _the last week in which cheese was allowed to be eaten before
Lent_.

cȳswyrhte f. _(female) cheese-maker_, LL 451[16].

cȳta m. _‘kite,’ bittern_, _Cp_.

cȳte (ē) f. _cottage, hut, cabin_, Æ: _cell, cubicle_, Æ.

cytel = citel

cytere = citere

cytwer m. _weir for catching fish_.

cȳð = (1) cȳðð, (2) cīð

±cȳðan _to proclaim, utter, make known, show forth, tell, relate_, _Cp,
Cr, Jn_; CP: _prove, show, testify, confess_, _Mt, VPs_: _exercise,
perform, practise_, _B_: (+) _confirm_, LL: (+) _make celebrated_.
wundor c. _perform a miracle_. [‘_kithe_’; cūð]

+cȳðednes f. _testimony_, #LPs# 121^4.

cȳðere m. _witness, martyr_, Æ.

cȳðig _known_: (+) _knowing, aware of_, DR.

cȳðing f. _statement, narration_, GD 86^14.

±cȳðlǣcan _to become known_.

cȳðling = cȳðing

±cȳðnes f. _testimony_: _testament_ (often of Old and New Test.), Æ:
_knowledge, acquaintance_.

cȳðð, cȳððu f. _kinship, relationship_: _‘kith,’ kinsfolk,
fellow-countrymen, neighbours_, _Lk_: _acquaintance, friendship_: (±)
_native land, home_, _Bo_; AO, CP: _knowledge, familiarity_, _Æ, BH_.

cywes- = cyfes-

cȳwð pres. 3 sg. of cēowan.

cȳwung = cēowung




=D=


dā f. _doe (female deer)_, Æ.

dǣd I. (ē) f. (nap. dǣda, dǣde) _‘deed,’ action, transaction, event_,
_Æ, B, Bl, VPs_. II. = dēad

dǣdbana m. _murderer_, LL 266[23].

dǣd-bēta (Æ), -bētere m. _a penitent_.

dǣdbētan _to atone for, make amends, be penitent, repent_, Æ. [dǣdbōt]

dǣdbētnes f. _penitence_.

dǣdbōt f. _amends, atonement, repentance, penitence_, _Mt_; AO.
[‘_deedbote_’]

dǣdbōtlihting f. _mitigation of penance_.

dǣdbōtnes = dǣdbētnes

dǣdcēne _bold in deed_, B 1645.

dǣdfrom _energetic_, #PPs# 109^8.

dǣdfruma † m. _doer of deeds (good or bad)_, _worker_.

dǣdhata m. _ravager_, B 275.

dǣdhwæt † _energetic, bold_.

dǣdlata m. _sluggard_.

dǣdlēan n. _recompense_, #Ex# 263.

dǣdlic _active_, #ÆGr#.

dǣdon = dydon pret. pl. of dōn.

dǣdrōf † _bold in deeds, valiant_.

dǣdscūa (#Cr# 257) = dēaðscūa?

dǣdweorc n. _mighty work_, #Ex# 575.

dæf- = daf-

±dæftan _to put in order, arrange_, Æ, CP.

+dæfte _mild, gentle, meek_, _Mt_. [‘_daft_’; gedafen]

+dæftelīce, +dæftlīce _fitly, in moderation, in season_, CP.

dæg m. gs. dæges; nap. dagas _day, lifetime_, _Æ, Mt, Mk_; AO, CP.
andlangne d. _all day long_. dæges, _or_ on d. _by day_. tō d., tō dæge
_to-day_. d. ǣr _the day before_. sume dæge _one day_. ofer midne d.
_afternoon_. on his dæge _in his time_. dæges and nihtes _by day and by
night_. lange on d. _far on, late in the day_. emnihtes d. _equinox_.
ealle dagas _always_, _Mt_: _Last Day_, _Bl_: _name of the rune for
=d=_.

dægcandel (o^2) † f. _sun_.

dægcūð _open, clear as the day_.

dǣge f. _(female) bread maker_.

dæge- = dæg-

dægehwelc _daily_.

dægenlic _of this day_.

dæges adv. v. dæg.

dæges-ēage, -ēge n. ‘_daisy_,’ _Lcd, WW_.

+dægeð pres. 3 sg. _dares_? _braves_? W 220^28.

dægfæsten n. _a day’s fast_.

dægfeorm f. _day’s provision_, EC 226^2.

dæghluttre adv. _clearly, as day_, #Gu# 665.

dæghryne = dægryne

dæghwām adv. _daily_.

dæghwāmlic _of day, daily_, Æ. adv. -līce, Æ, AO.

dæghwīl f. (pl.) _days, lifetime_, B 2726.

dæghwonlīce = dæghwāmlīce

dæglang (o^2) _lasting a day_, #Sol# 501.

dæglanges adv. _during a day_, Æ.

dæglic = dæghwāmlic

dægmǣl nm. _horologe, dial_.

dægmǣlspīlu f. _gnomon of a dial_, WW 126^31.

dægmēlscēawere m. _horoscope-observer, astrologer_, WW.

dægmete m. _breakfast, dinner_, WW 267^13.

dǣgol = dīgol

dæg-rēd (or ? dægred) (Æ, CP) -rǣd n. _daybreak, dawn_, _Lk_.
[‘_dayred_’]

dægrēdlēoma m. _light of dawn_, NC 280.

dægrēdlic _belonging to morning, early_.

dægrēdsang m. _matins_, RB, CM.

dægrēdwōma † m. _dawn_.

dægrīm † n. _number of days_.

dægrima m. _dawn, daybreak, morning_, _Æ_. [‘_day-rim_’]

dægryne _daily, of a day_, WW 224^29.

dægsang m. _daily service_, W 290^22.

dægsceald m? (_shield by day_?) _sun_, #Ex# 79.

dægsteorra m. _‘daystar,’ morning star_, _Æ, Lcd_.

dægswǣsendo np. _a day’s food_, LL (220^30).

dægtīd f. _day-time, time, period_.

dægtīdum _by day, in the day-time_.

dægtīma m. _day-time, day_, #LPs# 120^6.

dægðerlic _of the day, of to-day, daily, present_, Æ.

dægðern f. _interval of a day_, #Lcd#.

dægðerne adj. _for use by day, every-day_, CM.

dægwæccan fp. _day-watches_, WW 110^24.

dægweard m. _day-watchman_, WW 110^25.

dægweorc n. _work of a day, fixed or stated service_, _Ex_: _day-time_.
[‘_daywork_’]

dægweorðung f. _feast day_, #El# 1234.

dægwilla _wished for day_, #Gen# 2776.

dægwine n? _day’s pay_, #Gl#.

dægwist f. _food, meal_, Æ.

dægwōma † = dægrēdwōma

dæl I. nap. dalu n. _‘dale,’ valley, gorge, abyss_, _AO_. II. pret. 3
sg. of delan.

dǣl (ā) mn. (p. dæl-as, -e) _portion, part, share, lot_, _Cp, Bl, Gu_
(ā), _VPs_; AO, CP: _division, separation_, _Æ_ (ā): _quantity, amount_,
_Lcd_: _region, district_, AO. d. wintra _a good number of years_. be
dǣle _in part, partly_. be healfum dǣle _by half_. be ǣnigum dǣle _at
all, to any extent_. be ðǣm dǣle _to that extent_. cȳðan be dǣle _to
make a partial or ‘_ex parte_’ statement_. sume dǣle, be sumum dǣle
_partly_: _part of speech, word_, #ÆGr#. [‘_deal_’]

±dǣlan _to divide, part, separate, share_, _Da_; Æ, CP: _bestow,
distribute, dispense, spend, hand over to_, _An, Mk_: _take part in,
share with_, _Gen_: _be divided_. †hilde, earfoðe dǣlan _to fight,
contend_. [‘_deal_’]

+dǣledlīce _separately_.

dǣlend m. _divider_, Lk 12^4.

dǣlere m. _divider, distributor_, _WW_: _agent, negociator_, _Æ_:
_almsgiver_, Æ. [‘_dealer_’]

dæling f. _dividing, sharing_, #HGl# 423.

+dǣlland = +dālland

dǣllēas _deficient, unskilled_: _destitute of, without_.

dǣlmǣlum adv. _by parts or pieces_, Æ.

dǣl-neom-, -nym- = dǣlnim-

dǣlnes f. _sharing out_.

dǣlnimend m. _sharer, participator_, Æ: _participle_, #ÆGr#. [_Ger._
teilnehmend]

dǣlnimendnes f. _participation_, #BJPs# 121^2.

dǣlnimung f. _participation, portion, share_.

dǣlnumelnes = dǣlnimendnes

dǣm- = dēm-

dæn- = den-

dǣp = dēop

dære v. daru.

dærne = dierne

dærst, dærste (e) f. _leaven_, NG, DR: (pl.) _dregs, refuse_, _Lcd_ (e),
_Ps_. [‘_drast_’]

+dærsted _leavened, fermented_, NG.

dǣð = dēað

dǣwig = dēawig

+dafen I. n. _what is fitting_, GD 84^6. II. _becoming, suitable, fit,
proper_.

+dafenian (often impers.) _to beseem, befit, be right_, Æ.

+dafenlic _fit, becoming, proper, suitable, right_. adv. -līce.

dafenlīcnes f. _fit time, opportunity_.

+daflic = +dafenlic

dafn- = dafen-

+dafniendlic = +dafenlic

dāg m? (dāh) ‘_dough_,’ _Lcd_: _mass of metal_.

dagas, dages v. dæg.

dagian _to dawn, be day_, _BH_; Æ. [‘_daw_’]

dagung f. _day-break, dawn_, BH. on dagunge _at daybreak_.

dāh = dāg

dāl = dǣl

+dal n. _part_, GD 311^11.

dalc m. _bracelet, brooch_.

dalf (NG) = dealf pret. 3 sg. of delfan.

dalisc (? for *dedalisc) ‘_dedaleus_,’ WW 221^3.

+dālland n. _land under joint ownership, common land divided into
strips_. v. LL 2·443.

dālmǣd f. _meadow-land held in common and apportioned between the
holders_, KC 3·260^3.

dalmatice f. _dalmatic_ (vestment), ANS 84·13; GD 329^34.

dalu v. dæl.

darað, dareð = daroð

darian _to lurk, be hidden_, ÆL 23^322.

daroð † m. _dart, spear, javelin_. daroða lāf _those left by spears,
survivors of a battle_.

daroðhæbbende _spear-bearing_, #Jul# 68.

daroðlācende (eð) mp. _spear-warriors_.

daroðsceaft (deoreð-) m. _javelin-shaft_, #Gen# 1984.

daru f. gds. dære _injury, hurt, damage, calamity_, Æ.

datārum m. (indecl.) _date_.

dað _‘bloma,’ mass of metal_, WW 141^36.

Davītic adj. _of David (psalms)_.

dēacon = dīacon

dēad (±) ‘_dead_,’ _Æ, B, Mt_; AO, CP: _torpid, dull_. d. blōd
_congealed blood_.

dēad- = dēað-

dēadboren _still-born_, #Lcd# 1·206.

±dēadian _to die_, _JnL_. [‘_dead_’]

dēadlic _subject to death, mortal, perishable_, _Æ_: _causing death_,
_‘deadly,’ fatal_, _AO_: _about to die_. adv. -līce.

dēadrægel n. _shroud_, WW 37^6. [hrægl]

dēadspring m. _ulcer_, #Lcd#.

dēadwylle _barren_, AO 26^16.

dēaf I. ‘_deaf_,’ _Mt, Jul_; #VPs#: _empty, barren_, _CP_ 411^20. II.
pret. 3 sg. of dūfan.

-dēafian v. ā-d.

dēaflic = dēfelic

dēafu f. _deafness_, #Lcd#.

deag = dæg

dēag I. _hue, tinge_, _Æ, WW_: ‘_dye_,’ _WW_. II. pres. 3 sg. of dugan.

dēagan _to discolour, dye, colour_ (Earle); _to conceal oneself, hide_
(Leo). B 851.  [[from first edition]]

dēagel = dī(e)gol

dēaggede _gouty_, WW 161^31. [dēaw]

±dēagian _to ‘dye,’_ _OEG_.

dēagol = dīegol

dēagol- = dīgol-

dēagung f. _‘dying,’ colouring_, _Æ_.

dēagwyrmede _gouty_, WW 161^31. [dēaw]

dēah = dēag I. and II.

dēahl = dīgol

deal = deall

dealf pret. 3 sg. of delfan.

deall † _proud, exulting, bold, renowned_.

dear pres. 3 sg. of *durran.

dearc = deorc

deareð = daroð

dearf I. pret. 3 sg. of deorfan. II. _bold_, NG.

dearflic _bold, presumptuous_, NG.

dearfscipe m. _boldness, presumption_, NG.

dearn-unga, -unge (e^2, i^2) _secretly, privately, insidiously_, Æ,
AO, CP.

dearoð = daroð

dearr pres. 3 sg. of *durran.

dearste (#VPs#) = dærste  [[under “dærst”]]

dēað (ēo) m. _‘death,’ dying_, _An, Bo, Mt_; CP: _cause of death_, _Bl_:
in pl. _‘manes,’ ghosts_.

dēað- = dēad- (v. ES 39·324).

dēaðbǣre _deadly_, CP.

dēaðbǣrlic (dēad-) _deadly_.

dēaðbēacnigende _boding death_.

dēaðbēam m. _death-bringing tree_, #Gen# 638.

dēaðbedd † n. _bed of death, grave_.

dēaðberende _fatal, deadly_, CP.

dēaðbērnes f. _deadliness, destructiveness_, LkL 21^11.

dēaðcwalu † f. _deadly throe, agony_: _death by violence_.

dēaðcwealm m. _death by violence_, B 1670.

dēaðcwylmende _killed_.

dēaðdæg † m. _death-day_.

dēaðdenu † f. _valley of death_.

dēaðdrepe m. _death-blow_, #Ex# 495.

dēaðfǣge _doomed to death_, B 850.

dēaðfiren f. _deadly sin_, #Cr# 1207.

dēaðgedāl n. _separation of body and soul by death_, #Gu# 936.

dēaðgodas mp. _infernal deities_, WW 447^19.

+dēaðian _to kill_.

dēaðlēg m. _deadly flame_, #Gr# 983.

dēaðlic _‘deathly,’ mortal_, _Bl_: _deadly_: _dead_.

dēaðlicnes f. _mortality, mortal state_: _deadliness_.

dēaðmægen n. _deadly band_, #Gu# 867.

dēaðræced (= e^2) n. _sepulchre_, #Ph# 48.

dēaðrǣs m. _sudden death_, #An# 997.

dēaðrēaf n. _clothing taken from the dead, spoils_, WW 397^22.

dēaðrēow _murderous, fierce_, #An# 1316.

dēað-scūa, -scufa m. _death-shadow, spirit of death, devil_.

dēaðscyld f. _crime worthy of death_, LL 130´.

dēaðscyldig (LL), dēadsynnig (NG) _condemned to death_.

dēaðsele † m. _death-hall, hell_.

dēaðslege m. _death-stroke_, #Rd# 6^14.

dēaðspere n. _deadly spear_, #Rd# 4^53.

dēaðstede m. _place of death_, #Ex# 589.

dēaðsynnignes f. _guiltiness of death_, DR.

dēaððēnung f. _exequies, last offices to the dead, funeral_.

dēaðwang m. _plain of death_, #An# 1005.

dēaðwēge n. _deadly cup_, #Gu# 964. [wǣge]

dēaðwērig _dead_, B 2125.

dēaðwīc n. _dwelling of death_, B 1275.

dēaðwyrd f. _fate, death_, WW 408^23.

dēaw mn. ‘_dew_,’ _Æ, CP, VPs_.

+dēaw _dewy_.

dēawdrīas m. _fall of dew_? #Da# 277. [drēosan]

dēawig (ǣ, ē) ‘_dewy_,’ _Ex_.

dēawigendlīc? _dewy_, #HGl# 408.

dēawigfeðera † _dewy-feathered_.

dēawung f. _dew_, EHy 7^64.

dēawwyrm m. _‘dew-worm,’ ring-worm, tetter_, _Lcd_.

decan m. _one who has charge of ten monks_.

±dēcan _to smear, plaster_.

decanhād m. _office of a_ ‘decan.’

decanon = decan

Decembris m. _December_.

declīnian _to decline_, #ÆGr#.

declīnigendlic _subject to inflection_, #ÆGr#.

declīnung f. _declension_, A 8·313^5.

dēd I. (A) = dǣd. II. = dēad

dēde (#KGl#) = dyde pret. 3 sg. of dōn.

+dēfe (doefe once, in NG) _befitting, suitable, proper_: _meek, gentle,
kindly_. also adv.

+dēfelic _fit, becoming, proper_. adv. -līce, BH.

defen- = dafen-

dēflic = dēfelic

+dēfnes f. _mildness, gentleness_, #LPs# 89^10.

+deftlīce = +dæftlīce  [[under “dæftelīce”]]

deg = dæg

dēg (NG) = dēag pres. 3 sg. of dugan.

dēg- = dēag-, dīeg-, dīg-

degn = ðegn

dehter ds. of dohtor.

dehtnung (#KGl#) = dihtnung

del = dæl

dela nap. of delu.

delan^4 _to fall, decay_? (Grein) _to be arrogant, proud, boastful_
(Leo). #Gen# 23.  [[from first edition]]

dēlan = dǣlan

+delf n. _digging, excavation_, Æ, AO: _what is dug, trench, quarry,
canal_, Mdf.

delfan^3 _to ‘delve,’ dig, dig out, burrow_, _Æ, Bo, G_; AO: _bury_.

delfere m. _digger_, #Bo# 140^13.

delfīn _dolphin_, WW 293^13. [_L._]

delfīsen n. _spade_, WW.

delfung f. _digging_, WW 149^10.

+delgian = +telgian

dell nm. _dell, hollow, dale_, BH; Mdf.

delu f. _teat, nipple_, CP 405^1. [_OHG._ tili]

dem = demm

dēma m. _judge, ruler_, Æ, CP.

±dēman _to ‘deem’ (‘i-deme’), consider, think, estimate, compute_, _Æ,
BH_: _judge, determine, decide, decree, sentence, condemn_, _BH, G, El_;
CP: _assign_: (†) _praise, glorify_: (†) _tell, declare_, _FAp_.

dēmedlic _that may be judged_, GD 336^20.

dēmend † n. _judge, arbiter_.

dēmere m. _judge_, _MtL_ (oe). [‘_deemer_’]

demm m. _damage, injury, loss, misfortune_, AO, CP.

-demman v. for-d.

dēmon _demon, devil_, DR.

den = denn

dēn = dōn pp. of dōn.

Denalagu, f. _the ‘Dane law,’ law for the part of England occupied by
the Danes_, _LL_.

den-bǣre, -berende n. _swine-pasture_, Mdf.

dene = denu

Dene mp. _the ‘Danes,’_ _Chr_; AO.

deneland (æ) _valley_.

Denemearc (æ^1, a^3, e^3) Denm-, f. _Denmark_.

dengan (ncg) _to beat, strike_, NC 281.

denge = dyncge

Denisc ‘_Danish_,’ _Chr_. wk. nap. ðā Deniscan _the Danes_.

denn n. _‘den,’ lair, cave_, Æ; _WW_: _swine-pasture_, v. Mdf.

dennian (æ) _to become slippery_? †#Chr# 937.

denstōw f. _place of pasture_, BC 3·144^21.

denu f. _valley, vale, dale_, _Æ, Lk, VPs_; Mdf. [‘_dean_’]

dēof = dēaf pret. 3 sg. of dūfan.

dēofel-, dēofl- = dēofol-

deofenian = dafenian

dēofol mn. gs. dēofles, nap. dēoflu, dēofol, _a ‘devil,’ demon, false
god_, _B, Mt, VPs_; AO: _the devil_, _CP, Jn, Jul_; Æ: _diabolical
person_, _JnLR_. [_L._ diabolus]

dēofolcræft m. _witchcraft_, AO.

dēofolcund _fiendish_, #Jud# 61.

dēofoldǣd f. _fiendish deed_, #Da# 18.

dēofol-gield (AO, CP), -gild, -geld (AO, VHy), -gyld (Æ) n.
_devil-worship, idolatry_: _idol, image of the devil_, Æ.

dēofolgielda (y^3) m. _devil-worshipper, idolater_, ÆH 1·70^23.

dēofolgieldhūs n. _idol temple_, AO 284^9.

dēofolgītsung (dīwl-) f. _unrighteous mammon_, LkL 16^11.

dēofollic _devilish, diabolical, of the devil_, _Æ_. [‘_devilly_’] adv.
-līce.

dēofolscīn n. _evil spirit, demon_.

dēofolscīpe m. _idolatry_, NC 286.

dēofolsēoc _possessed by devils, lunatic_, Æ.

dēofolsēocnes f. _demoniacal possession_.

dēofolwītga m. _wizard, magician_, #Da# 128.

dēoful == dēofol

dēog pret. 3 sg. of dēagan.

dēohl, dēogol = dīegol

±dēon (A) _to suck_, JAW 19.

dēop I. _‘deep,’ profound_, _Ps_: _awful, mysterious_, CP: (†)
_heinous_, _Gu, Jul_: _serious, solemn, earnest_, _Ex_. d. cēap _high
price, great price_. II. n. _depth, abyss_, _Ex, Mt_: _the deep, sea_,
_Lk_.

dēope adv. _deeply, thoroughly, entirely, earnestly, solemnly_, _Ps_.

dēophycgende † dēophȳdig † _deeply meditating, pensive_.

dēopian _to get deep_, #Lcd# 125b.

dēoplic _deep, profound, thorough, fundamental_, Æ, CP: _grievous_. adv.
-līce ‘_deeply_,’ _Bo, WW_.

dēopnes f. _depth, abyss_, _LPs, Nic_: _profundity, mystery, subtlety_,
Æ. [‘_deepness_’]

dēopðancol _contemplative, very thoughtful_, W 248^7; A 8·329. adv.
-līce.

dēor I. n. _animal, beast_ (usu. wild), _Lk, Met, WW_; Æ, CP: _‘deer,’
reindeer_, _AO_. II. _brave, bold_, _An, Sol_: _ferocious_, _B_:
_grievous, severe, violent_, _Da, Sol_. [‘_dear_’] III. = dēore

dēoran = dȳran  [[variant of “dȳrsian”]]

dēorboren _of noble birth_, LL 104[34,1].

deorc _‘dark,’ obscure, gloomy_, _B, Ps_: _sad, cheerless_: _sinister,
wicked_, _Lk, Sat_. adv. deorce.

deorcegrǣg _dark grey_, WW.

deorcful _dark, gloomy_, _Sc_. [‘_darkfull_’]

deorclīce _‘darkly,’ horribly, foully_, _GPH_ 391^22.

deorcnes f. ‘_darkness_,’ _Sc_ 228^3.

deorcung f. _gloaming, twilight_, Æ.

dēorcynn n. _race of animals_, Æ.

dēore I. _‘dear,’ beloved_, _Jul_: _precious, costly, valuable_, _Bo_:
_noble, excellent_. II. adv. _dearly, at great cost_, _Met, WW_. III.
adv. _fiercely, cruelly_. [dēor II.]

dēoren _of a wild animal_.

deoreðsceaft = daroðsceaft

±deorf n. _labour_: _difficulty, hardship, trouble, danger_, Æ.

dēorfald m. _enclosure for wild beasts_, WW 201^34.

±deorfan^3 _to exert oneself, labour_, _Æ_: _be in peril, perish, be
wrecked_, AO. [‘_derve_’]

dēorfellen _made of hides_, WW 328^18.

+deorflēas _free from trouble_, #Gl#.

+deorfnes f. _trouble, tribulation_, #LPs# 45^2.

dēorfrið n. _preservation of game, deer-protection_, #Chr# 1086.

+deorfsum _troublesome, grievous_, #Chr# 1103; 1005 (y).

dēorgēat n. _gate for animals_, Ct.

dēorhege m. _deer-fence_, LL.

deorian (#Chr#) = derian

dēorlic _brave, renowned_, B 585.

dēorlīce _‘dearly,’ preciously, richly_, _El_: _sincerely, acceptably_,
AS 4^19.

dēorling (ī, ȳ) m. _‘darling,’ favourite, minion_, _Æ, Bo, CP_:
_household god_.

dēormōd † _courageous, bold_.

dēornett n. _hunting-net_, WW 183^12.

deornunga = dearnunga

deorsterlīce = dyrstelīce

dēortūn m. _park_, #Gl#.

dēor-wierðe (CP), -wurðe (Æ), -wyrðe _precious, dear, valuable, costly_,
_Bl, Bo_. [‘_dearworth_’]

dēorwyrðlic (eo^2, u^2) _precious, valuable_. adv. -līce _splendidly_,
Æ: _as a thing of value_, Æ.

dēorwyrðnes (u^2) f. _treasure_.

dēoð (NG) = dēað

dēpan = dȳpan

dēpe = dēop

deppan = dyppan

dēr = dēor

Dēra, Dēre mp. _Deirans, inhabitants of Deira_.

derian (w. d.) _to damage, injure, hurt_, _Bo_; Æ, AO, CP. [‘_dere_’]

deriendlic _injurious, mischievous, noxious, hurtful_, Æ.

dērling (NG) = dēorling

derne = dierne

derne- = dyrne-

dernegelegerscipe (derneleger-) m. _adultery, fornication_, N.

derneleger _adulterous_, NG. adv. -ere _licentiously_, NG.

dernunga (NG) = dearnunga

derodine m. _scarlet dye_, CP 83^25.

derste (#VPs#) = dærste  [[under “dærst”]]

derung f. _injury_, GD.

desig = dysig

dēst v. dōn.

dēð I. 3 p. sg. pres. of dōn. II. _‘manipulus,’ sheaf_? _EPs_ 125^6.

+dēðian _to kill, mortify_, DR, NG.

dēðing f. _putting to death_, DR 72^13.

deððan? _to suck_, LkR.

dēwig = dēawig

dīacon m. _‘deacon,’ minister, levite_, _Æ, BH, Jn_.

dīacongegyrela m. _deacon’s robe_, BH 90^2.

dīaconhād m. _office of a deacon_, Æ.

dīaconrocc m. _dalmatic_, CM 723.

dīaconðēnung f. _office of a deacon_, BH 272^17.

dīan (A) = dēon (A)

dīc mf. _‘dike,’ trench, ditch, moat_, _AO, BH, Chr_; Æ; Mdf: _an
earthwork with a trench_.

dīcere m. _digger_, Æ.

±dīcian _to make a dyke or bank_.

dīcsceard n. _breach of a dike_, LL 455[13].

dīcung f. _construction of a dike_, _WW_. [‘_diking_’]

dīcwalu f. _bank of a ditch_? KC 5·334^28.

dide, didon = dyde, dydon (v. dōn).

diegan _to die_, NR 38.

dīegel = dīegol

±dīegellīce (e, eo, i^1, o^2) _secretly_, AO, CP.

dīegelnes f. _privacy, secrecy, solitude_, CP: _hiding-place, recess_, Æ
(ī): _secret, secret thought, mystery_, AO, CP; Æ (ȳ).

±dīeglan, -lian _to hide, cover, conceal, hide oneself_, CP.

dīegle = dīegol

dīegol (ǣ, ē, ēa, ēo, ī, ȳ) I. adj. _secret, hidden, obscure, unknown,
deep_. [for compounds v. dīegel-.] II. adv. _secretly_. III. n.
_concealment, obscurity, secrecy, mystery_: _hidden place, grave_.

dīegolful (ē^1) _mysterious_, #Rd# 80^14.

dielf = dealf pret. 3 sg. of delfan.

dielgian = dilegian  [[headword spelled “dīlegian”]]

diend m. _suckling_, NG. [dēon]

dīere (ȳ) _‘dear,’ beloved_, _Lk_: _precious, costly_, _AO_: _noble,
excellent_.

±diernan (e, y) _to keep secret, hide, restrain, repress_, _AO_; Æ (y).
[‘_dern_’]

dierne (æ, e, y) I. _hidden, secret, obscure, remote_, _B, El, Lk_; CP:
_deceitful, evil, magical_, _B, CP, Gen_. [‘_dern_’] II. (y) n.
_secret_.

dierne- = derne-, dyrne-

dīerra comp. of dīere, dēore.

dīgan = dēagian

+dīgan (ē, ȳ) _to endure, survive, overcome_.

dīgel = dīegol (wk. dīgla, dīgle).

dīgel- = dīegel-

dīgl- = dīegl-

dīhl- = dīegel-

digner = dīnor

dīgol, dīgul = dīegol

dīgol- = dīegel-

  [[Printed on one line:
  dīgol, dīgul, dīgol- = dīegol, dīegel-]]

dihnian = dihtnian

diht n. _arrangement, disposal, deliberation, purpose_, Æ:
_administration, office_: _direction, command, prescription_, Æ:
_conduct_, Æ: (+) _piece of writing, composition, literary work_.

±dihtan, dihtian _to arrange, dispose, appoint, direct, dictate,
impose_, Æ, G: _compose, write_, _Æ_. [‘_dight_’]

dihtere m. _informant, expositor_, _WW_: _steward_, Æ (= dihtnere): _one
who dictates_, _Guth_. [‘_dighter_’]

dihtfæstendæg m. _appointed fast_.

dihtig = dyhtig

dihtnere m. _manager, steward_, Æ.

dihtnian = dihtian  [[under “dihtan”]]

±diht-nung, -ung f. _ordering, disposition_.

dile m. _‘dill,’ anise_, _Gl, Mt, Lcd_; CP.

±dīlegian _to destroy, blot out_, _CP_. [‘_dilghe_’; _Ger._ tilgen]

dilfð pres. 3 sg. of delfan.

dīlgian (CP) = dīlegian

dīlignes f. _annihilation, destruction_, #Gl#.

dill = dile

dim = dimm

dimhiw _of dark colour_.

dim-hof n., -hofe f. _place of concealment_, Æ.

dimhūs n. _prison_, OEG.

dimlic (y) _dim, obscure, secret, hidden_, Æ.

dimm _‘dim’ dark, gloomy, obscure_, _Bo, Gen, Sat_: _blurred, faint_,
_MH_: _wicked_: _wretched, grievous_.

dimmian _to be or become dim_.

dimnes (y) f. _‘dimness,’ darkness, obscurity, gloom_, _Lcd, VPs_; Æ:
_evil_: _obscuration, moral obliquity_, LL 476[14]: _a dark place_.

dimscūa m. _darkness, sin_? #An# 141.

dincge = dyncge

dīner = dīnor

ding I. v. dung I. II. = dung II.

dingiung f. _manuring_, WW 104^8.

dinig? (A 8·450) = dung

dīnor m. _a piece of money_, #ÆGr#. [_L._ denarius]

dīo- = dēo-, dīg-

dīowl- (NG) = dēofol-

dippan = dyppan

dirige _dirge, ‘vigilia,’_ CM.

dīrling (CP) = dēorling

dirn- = diern-, dyrn-

dis- = dys-

disc m. _‘dish,’ plate, bowl_, _Gl, Mt_.

discberend m. _dish-bearer, seneschal_, WW.

discipul m. _‘disciple,’ scholar_, _BH, Mt_.

discipula _female disciple_, BH 236^34.

discipulhād m. ‘_disciplehood_,’ _BH_.

disc-ðegn, -ðēn m. _dish-servant, waiter, seneschal, steward_, Æ.

disg, disig = dysig

dism (ðism) m. ‘_vapor_,’ ‘_fumus_,’ ES 41·324.

disma m., disme f? _musk_? _moss_? OEG 46^4 (A 30·123): ‘_cassia_,’ #Ps#
44^9 (y).

distæf m. ‘_distaff_,’ _WW_; Æ.

dīwl- = dēofol

dob- = dof-, dop-

dōc m. _bastard son_, WW.

docce f. _‘dock,’ sorrel_, _Lcd_.

docga m. ‘_dog_,’ _GPH_.

dōcincel n. _bastard_.

dōefe v. +dēfe.

dōeg = dæg

dōema (NG) = dēma

dōere m. _doer, worker_, DR 198^6.

doeð- = dēað-

dofen pp. of dūfan.

dofian (dobian) _to be doting_, #Gl#.

dofung f. _stupidity, frenzy, madness_, #Gl#.

dōger = dōgor

dogga = docga

dogian _to endure_? #Rd# 1^9.

dōgor mn. (ds. dōgor and dōgore) _day_, AO, CP.

dōgor-gerīm, -rīm † n. _series of days, time, allotted time of life_.

dōh = dāg

dohtar, dohter = dohtor

dohte pret. 3 sg. of dugan.

dohtig _competent, good, valiant, ‘doughty,’_ _Chr_. [dugan]

dohtor f. gs. dohtor, ds. dohtor, dehter, nap. ±doh-tor, -tra, -tru
‘_daughter_,’ _Mt_; Æ, AO, CP: _female descendant_, _Jn_.

dohtorsunu m. _daughter’s son, grandson_, #Chr# 982#c#.

dohx = dox

dol I. adj. _foolish, silly_, CP: _presumptuous_. [_Goth._ dwals; _Ger._
toll] II. n. _folly_, CP.

dolc = dalc

dolcswaðu = dolgswaðu  [[under “dolgswæð”]]

dolfen pp. of delfan.

dolg (dolh) nm. _wound, scar, cut, sore_: _boil, tumour_, Æ.

dolgbenn f. _wound_, #An# 1399.

dolgbōt f. _fine or compensation for wounding_, LL 62[23,2].

±dolgian _to wound_, #Rd#.

dolgilp m. _idle boasting_, B 509.

dolgrūne f. _pellitory_, #Lcd# 25a.

dolgsealf f. _poultice for a wound_, #Lcd#.

dolgslege † m. _wounding blow_, #An#.

dolgswæð n., dolgswaðu f. _scar_, Æ.

dolh == dolg

dolhdrenc m. _drink for a wound, antidote_.

dolhsmeltas mp. _linen bandages_, WW 107^33.

dolhwund † _wounded_.

dol-lic _audacious, rash, foolhardy, foolish_. adv. -līce, CP.

dolmanus = dulmunus

dolsceaða m. _fell destroyer_, B 479.

dolscipe m. _folly, error_, CP 387^34.

dolsmeltas = dolhsmeltas

dolsprǣc f. _silly talk_, CP 385^6.

dolwillen I. _rash, bold_, #Jul# 451. II. n. _rashness, madness_, #Jul#
202.

dolwīte n. _pain of a wound_? (BT), _punishment of the wicked, pains of
hell_? (Tupper), #Rd# 27^17.

dōm m. _‘doom,’ judgment, ordeal, sentence_, _BH, JnL_; Æ, CP: _decree,
law, ordinance, custom_, _Æ, VPs_: _justice, equity_, _VPs_: _opinion,
advice_: _choice, option, freewill_: _condition_: _authority, supremacy,
majesty, power, might_, _Jn_; AO: _reputation, dignity, glory, honour,
splendour_, AO: _court, tribunal, assembly_: _meaning, interpretation_.

-dōm masc. abstract suffix = _state, condition, power, etc._, as in
frēodōm.

dōmærn n. _judgment-hall, tribunal_.

dōmbōc f. _code of laws, statute-book, manual of justice_, _Æ, LL_.
[‘_doombook_’]

dōmdæg m. _‘doomsday,’ judgment-day_.

dōmēadig † _mighty, renowned_.

dōmere m. _judge_, _Bo, LL_; CP. [‘_doomer_’]

dōmern (Æ) = dōmærn

dōmfæst † _just, renowned, mighty_.

dōmfæstnes f. _righteous judgment_, #LPs# 100^1.

dōmgeorn † _ambitious_: _righteous_.

dōmhūs n. _law-court, tribunal_, #Gl#.

dōmhwæt adj. _eager for renown_? _strenuous in judgment_? #Cr# 428.

dōmian _to glorify, magnify_.

dōmisc adj. _of the day of judgment_.

dōmlēas † _inglorious, powerless_.

dōmlic _famous, glorious, praiseworthy_: _judicial_, Æ: _canonical_, CM
268. adv. -līce.

domne mf. _lord_, #Chr#: _nun, abbess_. [_L._]

dōmsetl n. _judgment-seat, tribunal_, Æ.

dōmsettend m. _jurisconsult_, WW 429^6.

dōmstōw f. _tribunal_, W 148^31.

dōmweorðung † f. _honour, glory_.

±dōn anv. pres. ptc. dō(e)nde, pres. 2 sing. dēst, 3 dēð, pret. sg.
dyde, pl. dydon (æ, i), pp. dōn _to ‘do’ (‘i-do’) make, act, perform_,
_Gu, Met, Ps_; Æ, AO, CP: _cause_ (often followed by the inf. with a
passive sense or by ðæt), CP, #VPs#. hig dydon rīcu settan = _they
caused kingdoms to be founded_ (= _founded kingdoms_), AO: _put, place,
take (from or to)_, _CP, Mt, Ps_. d. ūp _put ashore_. +d. up _exhume_:
_give, bestow, confer_, _Ps_: _consider, esteem_: _observe, keep_: to
avoid repetition of another verb, _Æ, Gen, Mk_: (+) _arrive at_, #Chr#:
(+) _halt, encamp, cast anchor_, #Chr#: (+) _reduce_, #Chr#. d. tō
hīerran hāde _promote, advance to a higher position_. d. tō nāhte
_annul, make of none effect_. d. tō witanne _cause to know_. betre,
furðor d. _prefer_. +d. forð _manifest, show forth_.

dōnlic _active_.

dop-ened, -ænid f. _diver, water-fowl, moorhen, coot_, #Gl#.

dopfugel m. _water-fowl, moorhen_, #Gl#.

-doppa v. dūfe-d.

-doppe v. fugol-d.  [[headword spelled “fugeldoppe”]]

doppettan _to plunge in, immerse_, Æ.

dor n. (nap. doru, dor) _door, gate_: _pass_, _Lcd, Ps_. [v. ‘_door_’]

dora m. _humble-bee_, _Ep, Lcd, WW_; Æ. [‘_dor_’]

dorfen pp. of deorfan.

dorste (Æ, AO, CP) pret. 3 sg. of *durran.

dorweard m. _doorkeeper_, N.

dott m. _head of a boil_, _Lcd_. [‘_dot_’]

-dōung v. on-d.

dox _dark-haired, dusky_, #Gl#.

doxian _to turn dark_, ES 43·330.

draca m. _dragon, sea-monster_, _B, MH, Ps_: _serpent_, _Pa, Ps_: _the
devil_: _standard representing a dragon or serpent_, GPH 392.
[‘_drake_’]

drā-centse, -cente, -conze f. _dragon-wort_, #Lcd#. [_L._ dracontea]

dræce (N) = draca

drǣdan^7 _to dread, fear_.

drǣf I. f. _expulsion_. II. = drāf

±drǣfan _to drive, drive out_.

drǣfednes, drǣfnes f. _trouble, distress_. [= drēfednes]

drǣfend I. m. _hunter_, #Cra# 38. II. = drēfend

+drǣg = +drēag

dræge f. _drag net_, WW. [drāgan]  [[headword spelled “dragan”]]

drægeð pres. 3 sg. of dragan.

drægnett n. _drag-net_, _WW_.

dræhð, drægð pres. 3 sg. of dragan.

drǣn = drān

drænc = drinc

dræp pret. 3 sg. of drepan.

dræst = dærst

dræstig _full of dregs, rubbishy_, _WW_. [dærste; ‘_drasty_’]
  [[under “dærst”]]

drǣt pres. 3 sg. of drǣdan.

drāf I. f. _action of driving_, _Bl_: _‘drove,’ herd_, Æ: _company,
band_, _W_; Æ. [drīfan] II. pret. 3 sg. of drīfan. III. = drǣf

dragan^6 _to drag, ‘draw,’_ _JnL, CP_: _go_.

drāgense = drācentse

drān (ǣ) f. ‘_drone_,’ _WW_; Æ.

dranc pret. 3 sg. of drincan.

drapa = dropa

drēa = drȳ

drēag, drēah pret. 3 sg. of drēogan.

+drēag † (ǣ) _apparition, vision_: _troop, crowd, rabble_:
_lamentation_.

drēahnian (ē) _to ‘drain,’ strain out_, _Lcd_.

dreaht pp. of dreccan.

drēam m. _joy, gladness, delight, ecstasy, mirth, rejoicing_, _Ct, Chr,
Sat_; AO: _melody, music, song_, _Æ_. [‘_dream_’]

drēamcræft m. _art of music_.

drēamere m. _musician_, #Bo# 38^7.

drēam-hæbbende ‡, -healdende ‡ _happy, joyful_.

drēamlēas † _joyless, sad_.

drēamlic _joyous, musical_, #Gl#.

drēamnes f. _singing_, #LPs# 136^3.

drēap pret. 3 sg. of drēopan.

drēap- (#VPs#) = drēop-

drēariend _inrushing tide_? WW 225^12.

drēarung = drēorung

drēas pret. 3 sg. of drēosan.

drec- = drecc-

±dreccan _to vex, irritate, torment, oppress, afflict_, _Æ, Gen, OET_.
[‘_dretch_’]

±dreccednes (Æ), dreccung (_Sc_) f. _tribulation, affliction_.
[‘_dretching_’]

drēd = drǣd pret. 3 sg. of drǣdan.

±drēfan _to stir up, excite, disturb, trouble, vex, afflict_, _B, Jn_;
Æ, CP. [drōf; ‘_dreve_’]

+drēfedlic _oppressive_, AO 38^14.

±drēfednes f. _tribulation, trouble, scandal_.

drēfend (ǣ) m. _disturber_, RB.

dreflian _to ‘drivel,’_ _WW_.

drēfre m. _disturber_, RB 121^12. [drōf]

drēfung f. _disturbance_, WW 109^2.

drēge = drȳge

drēgan = drȳgan

drēhnian (_Mt_) = drēahnian

dreht pp. of dreccan.

drēm- = drȳm-

drēme = drȳme

drenc m. _‘drink,’ drinking, draught_, _Æ, Lcd_; CP: _drowning_.
[drincan; ‘_drench_,’ ‘_drunk_’]

drencan _to give to drink, to ply with drink, make drunk_, _Ps_; CP:
_submerge, drown_, Æ. [‘_drench_’]

drenccuppe f. _drinking-cup_, WW 329^19.

drence- = drenc-, drinc-

drencflōd † m. _flood, deluge_.

drenchorn m. _drinking-horn_, Ct.

drenchūs n. _drinking-house_, WW 186^25.

dreng m. _youth, warrior_, _Ma_ 149. [‘_dreng_’; _ON._]

drēocræft = drȳcræft

dreofon = drifon pret. pl. of drīfan.

+drēog I. n. _keeping (shoes) in good condition_, Æ: _usefulness_? RB
123^6. tō +d. gān _to ease oneself_, RB 32^22. II. _sober, gentle
(horse)_, GD 78^12.

±drēogan^2 _to lead a (certain) life, do, work, perform, fulfil, take
part in, conduct_, _Gu, Ps_; AO. wīde d. _wander_: _be busy, employed_:
_experience, suffer, endure, sustain, tolerate_, _Ex_; CP: _to enjoy_.
[‘_dree_,’ ‘_i-dree_’]

+drēoglǣcan _to put in order, regulate, arrange, attend to_, Æ.

+drēoglīce (h) _discreetly, carefully_: _meekly, modestly, humbly_.

drēoh == drēog

±drēopan^2 _to drop_.

drēopian (ēa) _to drop, drip, trickle_.

drēopung f. _dropping_, #VPs# (ēa).

drēor † m. _blood_. [drēosan]

dreord pret. 3 sg. of drǣdan.

drēorfāh _bespattered with gore_, B 485.

drēorgian = drēorigian

drēorig adj. †_bloody_, _blood-stained_, _B_: _cruel, grievous_, _Gu_:
_sad, sorrowful_: _headlong_? [‘_dreary_’] adv. -līce _sorrowfully_,
_Æ_. [‘_drearily_’]

drēorigferð _sorrowful_, #Cr# 1109.

drēorighlēor _sad of countenance_, #Wa# 83.

drēorigian _to be dreary, sad_, Æ.

drēorigmōd _sad in mind_, #Gen# 2804.

drēorignes f. _sadness, sorrow_, _GD_; Æ. [‘_dreariness_’]

drēorilic, drēorlic = drēorig

drēorsele m. _dreary hall_, #Wif# 50.

drēorung † f. _falling, distilling, dropping_. [drēosan]

±drēosan^2 _to fall, perish_: _become weak, fail_.

drep = ðrep?

+drep m. _stroke, blow_, #An# 1446.

±drepan^5 _to strike, kill, overcome_, _B_. [‘_drepe_’]

drepe † (y) m. _stroke, blow, violent death_.

+drettan _to consume_, #PPs# 70^12.

drī- = drȳ-

drif I. (±) f. _fever_, MkR 1^31; ANS 84·324. II. (+) _driving,
movement_: _what is driven, stubble_.

±drīfan^1 _to ‘drive,’ force, hunt, follow up, pursue_, Æ, AO, CP:
_drive away, expel_, _Mk_: _practise, carry on_, _RB_; Æ: _rush against,
impel, drive forwards or backwards_, _Cr, KC_: _undergo_.

drīgið, drīgð pres. 3 sg. of drēogan.

drīhð pres. 3 sg. of drēogan.

drīm = drēam

±drinc _‘drink,’ beverage_, _Bo, Chr, G_: _draught_, _Mt_: _drinking,
carousal_.

drinc- v. also drync-, drenc-.

drinca (m.), drince (f.) = drinc

+drinca m. _cup-bearer_, NC 293.

drincan^1 _to drink_, _Æ, Lk_; AO, CP. pp. druncen _refreshed, elate
(with drink)_, _drunk_.

+drincan _to swallow up, engulf_, Æ.

drincere m. _‘drinker,’ drunkard_, _MtL_.

drīorig = drēorig

drisn f? _false hair_? _hairy roots of plants_? (BT)

+drītan^1 ‘_cacare_,’ _Lcd_ 1·364^9. [‘_drite_’]

drīting f. ‘_egestio_’ (sc. _ventris_), A 8·449.

±drōf _dirty, muddy, swampy, turbid, troubled_, _Lcd_. [‘_drof_’;
drēfan]

drōfe _grievously, severely_, #Lcd# 3·286^11.

+drōfednes = +drēfednes

drōfig _troubled_.

drōflic _troublesome, tormenting_.

drōg pret. 3 sg. of dragan.

droge f? _excrement_, #Lcd# 118b.

drogen pp. of drēogan.

drōgon pret. pl. of dragan.

drōh pret. 3 sg. of dragan.

drohnian = drohtnian  [[under “drohtian”]]

droht I. m? n? _condition of life_. II. (ō?) _pull, draught_, WW 486^27.

drohtað m. _mode of living, conduct_: _environment, society_:
_condition, employment, vocation_.

drohtian (CP), drohtnian (Æ) _to conduct oneself, behave, associate
with, lead a life, live, continue_. [drēogan]

droht(n)oð = drohtað

drohtnung = drohtung

  [[Printed on one line:
  droht-(n)oð, -nung = droht-að, -ung]]

drohtung f. _condition, way of life, reputation, conduct_, CP.

dronc = dranc pret. 3 sg. of drincan.

dropa m. _a ‘drop,’_ _Az, Lk, VPs_; AO, CP: _gout_? _Lcd_: _humour,
choler_.

+dropa m. _a kind of date_, OEG 474.

dropen I. pp. of drēopan. II. (B 2891) = drepen pp. of drepan.

drop-fāg, -fāh I. _spotted, speckled_, #Lcd#. II. _starling_, #Gl#.

dropian _to ‘drop,’ drip, trickle_, _Ps_.

dropmǣlum _drop by drop_, Æ.

droppetan, -ian _to drop, drip, distil_.

droppetung, drop(p)ung (_Ps_) f. _‘dropping,’ dripping, falling_, Æ.

droren pp. of drēosan.

+drorenlic _perishable_, NC 293.

drōs, drōsna (Æ) m., drōsne (#VPs#) f. _sediment, lees, dregs, dirt,
ear-wax_, _WW_. [drēosan; ‘_dross_’]

drūgað = drūgoð

±drūgian _to dry up, wither_. [drȳge]

drugon pret. pl. of drēogan.

drūgoð f., drūgoða m. _‘drought,’ dryness_, _WW_: _dry ground, desert_,
_LPs_. [drȳge]

drūgung = drūgoð

druh m. _dust_? #Soul# 17.

druncen I. fn. _drunkenness_. II. pp. of drincan. III. adj. _‘drunken,’
drunk_, _Sc_; AO.

druncenes = druncennes

druncengeorn _hankering after drink, drunken_.

druncenhād m. _drunkenness_.

druncenig _drunken_, LkL 12^45.

druncenlǣwe ‘_inebrians_,’ #CPs# 22^5.

druncennes f. _‘drunkenness,’ intoxication_, _AO, Lk_; Æ.

druncenscipe m. _drunkenness_.

druncenwillen _drunken_, CP 401^29.

druncmennen n. _drunken maidservant_? #Rd# 13^1.

±druncnian _to be drunk_, Æ: _sink, drown_, _MtL_. [‘_drunken_’]

druncning f. _drinking_, #LPs# 22^5.

druncon pret. pl. of drincan.

drupian = dropian

drupon pret. pl. of drēopan.

druron pret. pl. of drēosan.

drūsian † _to droop, become sluggish, stagnant, turbid_. [drēosan]

drūt f. _beloved one_, DD 291.

drūw- = drūg-

drȳ m. _magician, sorcerer_, Æ, AO: _sorcery_. [_Celt._ drūi]

+drycned _afflicted_, AO 102^10.

drȳcræft m. _witchcraft, magic, sorcery_, Æ: _magician’s apparatus_.

drȳcræftig _skilled in magic_.

drȳcræftiga m. _sorcerer_, GD 27^15.

drȳecge = drȳicge

drȳfan = (1) drīfan; (2) drēfan

drȳg = drȳ

±drȳgan (ī) _to ‘dry,’ dry up, rub dry_, _Bo, Jn_; CP.

drȳge (ī) ‘_dry_,’ _A, Bo, Mt_: _parched, withered_, _Lk_. on drȳgum _on
dry land_. tō drȳgum _to the dregs_.

drȳgnes (ī) f. _dryness_.

drȳgscēod _dry-shod_, W 293^17.

drȳhst pres. 2 sg. of drēogan.

dryht (i) † f. (±)_multitude, army, company, body of retainers, nation,
people_, _Ex_: pl. _men_. [‘_dright_’; drēogan]

+dryhta m. _comrade_.

dryhtbealo = dryhtenbealo  [[headword spelled “dryhtenbealu”]]

dryhtbearn n. _princely youth_, B 2035.

dryhtcwēn f. _noble queen_, #Wid# 98.

dryhtdōm m. _noble judgment_, #VPs#.

dryht-ealdorman (NC), -ealdor (WW) m. _‘paranymphus,’ bridesman_.

dryhten (i) m. _ruler, king, lord, prince_, _Æ, B_: _the Lord, God,
Christ_, CP. [‘_drightin_’]

dryhtenbēag (drihtin-) m. _payment (to the king) for killing a
freeman_, LL.

dryhtenbealu † n. _great misfortune_.

dryhtendōm? m. _rule, majesty, glory_, #An# 1001.

dryhtenhold (i) _loyal_, #Gen# 2282.

dryhtenlic _lordly_: _divine, of the Lord_, Æ. adv. -līce.

dryhtenweard m. _lord, king_, #Da# 535.

dryhtfolc † n. _people, troop_.

dryhtgesīð m. _retainer, warrior_, #Fin# 44.

dryhtgestrēon n. _princely treasure_, #Rd# 18^3.

dryhtguma m. †_warrior, retainer, follower, man_: _bridesman_.

dryhtin- = dryhten-

dryhtlēoð n. _national song, hymn_, #El# 342.

dryhtlic (i) _lordly, noble_, _B, Gen_. d. gebed _the Lord’s Prayer_.
[‘_drightlike_’]. adv. -līce.

dryhtmann m. _bridesman_, #Gl#.

dryhtmāðm m. _princely treasure_, B 2483.

dryhtnē m. _warrior’s corpse_, #Ex# 163.

dryhtscipe † m. _lordship, rulership, dignity_: _virtue, valour, heroic
deeds_.

dryhtsele † m. _princely hall_.

dryhtsibb † f. _peace, high alliance_.

+dryhtu ‘_elementa_,’ OEG.

dryhtwēmend, -wēmere (i) m. _bridesman_, OEG 1774.

dryhtweras † mp. _men, chieftains_.

dryhtwuniende ‡ _living among the people_.

dryhtwurð (i) _divine_, Æ.

dryhtwurða (i) m. _theologian_.

drȳhð pres. 3 sg. of drēogan.

drȳicge f. _witch_.

drȳlic _magic, magical_.

drȳman (ē; = ī) _to sing aloud, rejoice_, _LPs_. [‘_dream_’]

drȳmann m. _sorcerer, magician_, Æ.

±drȳme (ē), +drȳmed _melodious, harmonious, cheerful_.

drync m. _‘drink’ (‘drunk’), potion, draught, drinking_, _Cp_.

drync- v. also drenc-, drinc-.

dryncehorn (i) _drinking-horn_.

dryncelēan (i) n. _scot-ale, the ale given by a seller to a buyer on
concluding a bargain_ (BT). v. LL 2·56.

dryncfæt (i) n. _drinking vessel_.

dryncgemet (i) n. _a measure of drink_, NC 287.

+dryncnes f. _immersion, baptism_, ÆL 23b, 723.

dryncwīrig _drunk_, WW 437^21.

±drȳpan _to let drop, cause to fall in drops_, _Æ, AO_: _moisten_, Æ.
[‘_dripe_’]

drype = drepe

dryre † m. _ceasing, decline_: _fall, deposit_. [drēosan]

dryslic _terrible_, WW 191^28.

drysmian † _to become obscure, gloomy_.

±drysnan _to extinguish_, NG. [drosn]  [[form of “drōs”?]]

+drysnian _to vanish, disappear_, LkL 24^31.

dubbian _to ‘dub,’ strike, knight (by striking with a sword)_, _Chr_
1085#e#.

dūce f. ‘_duck_,’ _Ct_.

±dūfan^2 _to duck, ‘dive,’_ _Rd_; Æ: _immerse_, _BH, Rd_: (+) _sink, be
drowned_, AO, CP.

dūfedoppa m. _pelican_, _LPs_. [‘_divedap_’]

dugan pres. 1, 3 dēag, dēah, pl. dugon, pret. dohte swv. (usu. impers.)
_to avail, be worth, be capable of, competent, or good for anything_,
_MtL_: _thrive, be strong_: _be good, virtuous kind_, _B, Sat_.
[‘_dow_’]

dug-að, -eð, -oð = duguð

duguð fm. _body of noble retainers, people, men, nobles, the nobility_,
_Ex_; AO: _host, multitude, army_: _the heavenly host_: _strength,
power_: _excellence, worth_, _Hy_; Æ, AO: _magnificence, valour, glory,
majesty_: _assistance, gift_: _benefit, profit, wealth, prosperity,
salvation_, _Cr_: _what is fit, or seemly, decorum_. [‘_douth_’]

duguðealdor m. _chief man, president_.

duguðgifu (a^2, e^2) f. _munificence_, #Gl#.

duguðlic _authoritative, chief, noble_, OEG. adv. -līce.

duguðmiht f. _supreme power_.

duguðnǣmere m. ‘_municeps_,’ OEG 7^12.

duhte = dohte (v. dugan).

dulfon pret. pl. of delfan.

dulhrune = dolgrune  [[headword spelled “dolgrūne”]]

dulmunus? m. _a kind of warship_, AO.

dumb _‘dumb,’ silent_, _An, Mt_; Æ, CP.

-dumbian v. ā-d.

dumbnes f. _dumbness_, NC 282.

dun = dunn

dūn fm. nap. dūna, dūne _‘down,’ moor, height, hill, mountain_, _Bl,
Chr, Mt_; Æ; Mdf. of dūne _down, downwards_.

dūn-ælf, -elf, -ylf f. _mountain elf_.

dūne _down, downwards_. [dūn]

dūnelfen f. _mountain elf_, WW 189^9.

dūnestīgende _descending_, #VPs# 87^5.

dunfealu _dun-coloured_, WW.

dung I. f. ds. dyng, ding _prison_, #An# 1272. II. f. ‘_dung_,’ _WW_.

dungrǣg _dark, dusky_, WW 246^4. [dunn]

dunh- = dimh-

dūnhunig n. _honey from downland_, #Lcd# 132a.

duniendlic (dunond-) _falling down, tottering_, #LPs# 108^10 (BT).

dūnland n. _downland, open country_.

dūnlendisc _mountainous_.

dūnlic _of a mountain, mountain-dwelling_, WW 376^6.

dunn _‘dun,’ dingy brown, dark-coloured_, _Ct, WW_.

dunnian _to obscure, darken_, _Bo_. [‘_dun_’]

dunondlic v. duniendlic.

Dūnsǣte mp. _inhabitants of the mountains of Wales_, LL.

dūn-scræf † n. nap. -scrafu _hill-cave_.

dure == duru

durfon pret. pl. of deorfan.

durhere (durere) m. _folding door_, #Gl#.

durran* (+ in NG) swv. pres. 1, 3 sg. dear(r), 2 dearst, pl. durron,
subj. durre, dyrre, pret. sg. dorste (u, y), pl. dorston _to ‘dare,’
venture, presume_, _Æ, AO, BH, Bo, Met_.

durstodl n. _door-post_, WW.

duru (dure) f. gs. dura, ds. and nap. dura, duru _‘door,’ gate, wicket_,
_B, G_; CP, #Chr#.

duruhaldend (e^2) _doorkeeper_, JnL 18^17.

durustod (WW) = durstodl

duruðegn m. _doorkeeper_, #An# 1092.

duruðīnen f. _female door-keeper_.

duruweard m. _doorkeeper_, _Æ, JnL_ (durweard). [‘_doorward_’]

dūst (ū) n. ‘_dust_,’ _Æ, Lcd_; AO, CP.

dūstdrenc m. _drink made from the pulverized seeds of herbs_, #Lcd#.

dūstig _dusty_, OEG 15; 3^9.

dūstscēawung f. _(viewing of dust), visit to a grave_, #Bl# 113^29.

dūstswerm m. _dust-like swarm_, OEG 23^52.

dūsð = dūst

dūðhamor m. _papyrus, sedge_, WW.

dwæl- = dwel-

+dwǣrian = +ðwǣrian

±dwǣs I. _dull, foolish, stupid_. II. m. _clumsy impostor_, ÆL 23^696.

±dwǣscan _to put out, extinguish, destroy_.

dwǣsian _to become stupid_, HL.

dwæslic _foolish_. adv. -līce.

+dwǣsmann m. _fool_, ÆL 17^101.

dwǣsnes f. _stupidity, foolishness_, Æ.

dwal- = dwol-

dwān pret. 3 sg. of dwīnan.

dwealde pret. 3 sg. of dwellan.

dwel- = dwol-

dwelian _to lead astray, deceive_, Æ.

dwellan pret. sg. dwealde, pp. dweald _to lead astray, hinder, prevent,
deceive_, _Bo, Rd_; Æ: _to be led astray, wander, err_, _Æ, Mt_.
[‘_dwele_,’ ‘_dwell_’]

dwelsian _to wander_, #LPs# 118^110.

+dweola, +dweolsa = +dwola

dweoligan = dwellan

dweorg (e, i) m. ‘_dwarf_,’ _Gl_. [_Ger._ zwerg]

dweorge-dwosle, -d(w)os(t)le f. _pennyroyal, flea-bane_, #Gl, Lcd#.

dweorh = dweorg

±dwild (y) n. _error, heresy_, _Chr_. [‘_dwild_’]

+dwildæfterfolgung (dwel-) f. _heresy_, A 8·450; 13·318.

+dwildlic (y) _deceptive_? W 196^20.

±dwi-mor (-mer) n. _phantom, ghost, illusion_, Æ.

+dwimorlic _illusory, unreal_. adv. -līce. Æ.

dwīnan^1 _to waste away, languish, disappear_, _Lcd, WW_. [‘_dwine_’]

+dwol _heretical_.

±dwola m. _error, heresy_, _BH, MtLR_: _madman, deceiver, heretic_, _Æ,
Bl_: ‘_nenia_,’ MtL p. 8^9. [‘_dwale_’]

+dwolbiscop m. _heretical bishop_.

±dwolcræft m. _occult art, magic_.

dwolema = dwolma

+dwolen † _perverse, wrong, erroneous_.

+dwolfær n. _a going astray_, RHy 6^36.

+dwolgod m. _false god, idol, image_, W 106^30.

±dwolian _to be led astray, err, wander_, _BH_; CP. [‘_dwele_’]

dwollic _foolish_: _erroneous, heretical_, Æ. adv. -līce.

±dwolma m. _chaos_.

±dwolman m. _heretic_, Æ, AO, CP.

+dwolmist m. _mist of error_.

+dwolsprǣc f. _heretical talk_.

+dwolsum _misleading, erroneous_, Æ.

dwolðing n. _imposture, idol_.

dwolung f. _foolishness, insanity_, WW 390^31.

dwomer = dwimor

dworgedwostle = dweorgedwosle

dwyld = dwild

dwylman v. fordwilman.

dwy-mer, -mor == dwimor

dwyrgedwysle = dweorgedwosle

dybbian _to pay attention to_, OEG 645.

dȳdan (= ī) _to kill_, LL. [dēad]

dyde pret. 3 sg., dydon pret. pl. of dōn.

dyder- = dydr-

dydrian _to deceive, delude_.

dydrin m? _yolk_, #Lcd#. [_Ger._ dotter]

dydrung (= i) f. _delusion, illusion_, Æ.

dȳfan (= ī) _to dip, immerse_.

dȳfing f. _immersion_, W 36^9.

dȳfst pres. 2 sg. of dūfan.

dȳgel-, dȳgl-, dȳhl- = dīegol-, dīeg(o)l-

dyht = diht

dyhtan = dihtan

dyhtig (o) _‘doughty,’ strong_, _B, Gen_. [dugan]

dyle = dile

+dylegian = +dilegian  [[headword spelled “dīlegian”]]

dylsta m. _festering matter, filth, mucus_, #Lcd#.

dylstiht _mucous_, #Lcd# 26a.

dym- = dim-

dyn- = din-

±dyn = dyne

dyncge f. _dung, manure, litter_: _manured land, fallow land_, OEG.
[dung]

dyne m. _‘din,’ noise_, _Sat, Sol_.

+dyngan (AO), dyngian (_WW_) _to ‘dung.’_

dynian _to make a ‘din,’ sound, resound_, _B_; Æ: _stream_? ANS 118·385.

dȳnige f. _a plant_, #Lcd# 113b. [dūn]

dynn = dyne

dynnan = dynian

dynt m. _‘dint,’ blow, stroke, bruise, stripe_, _JnL_; CP: _thud_.

dȳp = dēop

dȳpan I. _to ‘dip’_: _baptize_, _MtR_ (ē): (+) _anoint_, #EPs# 140^5.
II. _to make greater_, LL.

dȳpe = dēop

dyple _double_, A 8·334^10.

dyppan (e, i) _to ‘dip,’ immerse_, _Lcd, Mk_: _baptize_, _MtR_.

dyr == dēor

dyre ds. of duru.

dȳre adj. = dīere

+dyre n. _door-post_, Æ.

±dyrfan _to afflict, injure_; _imperil, endanger_. v. ES 39·342.
[deorfan]

dyrfing f? ‘_actio_,’ GPH 395.

dyrfð pres. 3 sg. of deorfan.

dyrn- = diern-, dern-

dyrneforlegen _adulterous_, LL (144^19).

dyrnegeligre I. (ie, e) n. _adultery_, AO, CP. II. m. _fornicator_, DR
107^1.

dyrngewrit n. _apocryphal book_, WW 347^38.

dyrnhǣmende (i) _fornicating, adulterous_, WW 383^40.

dyrnlīce _secretly_, #Lcd# 3·424^30.

dyrnlicgan^5 _to fornicate_.

dyrnmaga m. _president at mysteries_, GPH 397.

dyrnunga = dearnunga

dyrodine = derodine

dȳrra = dīerra

dyrre v. *durran.

+dȳrsian _to praise, glorify, hold dear, prize_, #Jud# 300. [dīere]

+dyrst f. _tribulation_, #Hell# 108.

dyrste = dorste pret. 3 sg. of *durran.

+dyrstelīce = dyrstiglīce  [[form of “dyrstig”]]

±dyrstig _venturesome, presumptuous, daring, bold_, CP. adv. -līce.
[*durran]

+dyrstigian _to dare, presume_, BH 468^19.

±dyrstignes f. _boldness, insolence, daring, presumption, arrogance,
rashness_, Æ, CP.

dyrstingpanne = hyrstingpanne
  [[redirected to “hierstingpanne” under “hierste”]]

±dyrstlǣcan _to presume, dare_, Æ.

+dyrstlǣcung f. _courage, boldness_, GD 71^19.

dyrstnes = dyrstignes

dyru ds., dyrum dp. of duru.

dȳr-wurðe, -wyrðe = dēorwierðe

dys- = dis-

dyseg = dysig

dyseg- = dysg-

  [[Printed on one line:
  dyseg == dysig, dysg-]]

dyselic (Æ) = dyslic

dysgian _to act foolishly, make mistakes_, _Bo_; Æ: _blaspheme_, _G_.
[‘_dizzy_’]

dysgung f. _folly, madness_, #Lcd# 53b.

dysian = dysgian

dysig (e, i) I. _foolish, ignorant, stupid_, _Bl, Mt_; Æ, CP.
[‘_dizzy_’] II. n. _foolishness, error_, AO, CP. III. m. _fool_, _VPs_
91^6.

dysigan = dysgian

dysigdōm m. _folly, ignorance_.

dysignes f. _folly, madness, blasphemy_, _BH_; Æ, AO. [‘_dizziness_’]

dysigu = dysig II.

dyslic _foolish, silly, stupid_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce.

dȳstig _dusty_, WW 517^23. [dūst]

dyttan _to shut to, close, stop_.

dȳð f. _fuel, tinder_, OEG 2^43; cp. 1655n.

dȳð-homar, -homer = dūðhamor




=E=


ē ds. of ēa.

ēa I. f. (usu. indecl. in sg., but with occl. gs. ēas; ds. īe, ē, ǣ, ēæ;
nap. ēa, ēan; gp. ēa; dp. ēa(u)m, ēan) _water, stream, river_, _Chr,
Ps_; Æ, AO. [‘_ea_’; _Goth._ ahwa] II. interj. v. ēalā.

ēac I. adv. _also, and, likewise, moreover_, Æ, AO, CP. ge...ge ēac
_both...and also_. nē...nē ēac... _neither...nor even..._ ēac swā, ēac
swilce _also, likewise, moreover, as if_. ēac gelīce _likewise_. ēac
hwæðre _however, nevertheless_. ēac ðon _besides_. II. prep. w. d.
_together with, in addition to, besides_. [_Ger._ auch]

ēaca m. _addition, increase, reinforcement, advantage, profit, usury,
excess_, _Chr_; Æ, AO, CP. tō ēacan (w. d.) _in addition to, besides,
moreover_, _Bo_. [‘_eke_’]

ēacan = īecan

ēacen _increased, augmented_: _richly endowed, strong, great, vast,
vigorous_: _pregnant_.

ēacencræftig _huge_, B 2280.

ēacerse f. _water-cress_, #Lcd# 35b. [ēa]

ēacian _to increase_, CP.

±ēacnian _to add, increase, be enlarged_: _become pregnant, conceive,
bring forth_, Æ, CP.

ēacniendlic adj. _to be increased_, OEG 1078.

±ēacnung f. _increase_, #Gl#: _conception, bringing forth_, Æ.

ēad † n. _riches, prosperity, good fortune, happiness_.

ead- = ed-

ēaden † (pp. of *ēadan) _granted_.

eadesa = adesa

ēadfruma † m. _giver of prosperity_.

ēadga wk. form of ēadig.

ēadgian = ēadigan

ēadgiefa † m. _giver of prosperity_.

ēadgiefu † f. _gift of prosperity_.

ēadhrēðig † _happy, blessed, triumphant_.

ēadig _wealthy, prosperous_, _Cr_: _fortunate, happy, blessed, perfect_,
_Gu, VPs_; Æ, CP. [‘_eadi_’]

±ēadigan _to count fortunate, call blessed_, HL: _enrich, make happy_.

ēadiglic _prosperous, rich, happy, blessed_. adv. -līce.

ēadignes f. _happiness, prosperity_, Æ.

eadlēan == edlēan

ēadlufu f. _blessed love_, #Jul# 104.

ēadmēd, ēadmōd == ēaðmōd

ēadmētto = ēaðmēttu

ēadnes f. _inner peace, ease, joy, prosperity_, _Run_: _gentleness_.
[‘_eadness_’; ēað]

ēadocce f. _water-lily_.

eador = (1) geador, (2) eodor

ēadorgeard m. _inclosure of veins, body_? (GK) #An# 1183 (or ? ealdor-).

eaduse (A 10·143^90) = adesa

ēadwela † m. _prosperity, riches, happiness_.

ēæ v. ēa.

eæ- = ea-

eafera = eafora

ēafisc † m. _river-fish_.

eafor I. mn? _the obligation due from a tenant to the king to convey
goods and messengers_? (BT), Ct. II. (*) _draught-horse_, v. LL 2·57.
III. = eofor, eafor- = eofor-

eafora † m. _posterity, son, child_; _successor, heir_. [cp. _Goth._
afar]

eafoð † n. _power, strength, might_.

eafra = eafora

eaftra = æfterra

ēagæppel (a^2) m. _apple of the eye, eyeball_.

ēagbrǣw m. _eyelid_, _Lcd_ 1·352. [‘_eyebree_’]

ēagduru f. _window_, MH.

ēage (ē) n. ‘_eye_,’ _G, Lcd_; AO, CP: _aperture, hole_, _Lk_.

ēagēce m. _eye-ache_, #Lcd#.

ēagflēah m. _albugo, a white spot in the eye_, WW.

ēaggebyrd f. _nature of the eye_? #Ph# 301.

ēaggemearc (ēah-) n. _limit of view, horizon_, DD 148.

ēaghring (ēah-, ēh-) m. _eye-socket, pupil_, Æ.

ēaghðyrl = ēagðyrel

ēaghyll m. _eyebrow_, WW 415^22.

ēaghyrne (hēah-) m. _corner of the eye_, WW 156^41.

ēagmist (ēah-) m. _dimness of the eyes_, #Lcd# 11a.

ēagor == ēgor

eagospind = hagospind

ēagsealf f. ‘_eye-salve_,’ _WW_.

ēagsēoung f. _disease of the eye, cataract_, WW 414^12.

ēagsȳne _visible to the eye_. adv. -sȳnes, Æ.

ēagðyrel n. _eye-hole, window_, _BH_. [‘_eye-thurl_’]

ēag-wærc, -wyrc, -wræc m. _pain of the eyes_, #Lcd#.

ēagwund f. _wound in the eye_, LL 20[47].

ēagwyrt f. _eye-wort, eye-bright_, #Lcd#.

ēah- = ēag-, ēa-

eaht (a, æ, e) f. _assembly, council_. e. besittan _to hold a council_:
_esteem, estimation, estimated value_.

ēaht = ǣht

eahta (a, æ, e) ‘_eight_,’ _B, Chr_; CP.

eahtafeald _eightfold_, Æ.

eahtahyrnede _eight-cornered_, Æ 2·496^33.

eahtan † I. _to persecute, pursue_. II. _to estimate, appreciate_.

eahtanihte _eight day’s old (moon)_.

eahtatēoða ‘_eighteenth_,’ _AO_.

eahta-tīene, -tȳne ‘_eighteen_,’ _Lk_ (eht-).

eahtatig _eighty_, AO.

eahtawintre _of eight years old_, Æ.

eahtend m. _persecutor_, #PPs# 118^150.

eahtēoða = (1) eahtatēoða, (2) eahtoða

eahtere m. _appraiser, censor_, #Lcd#.

eahteða (AO) = eahtoða

±eahtian (æ, e) _to estimate, esteem_, CP: _consult about, consider,
deliberate_: _watch over_, Æ: _speak of with praise_. [_Ger._ achten]

+eahtiendlic _estimable_.

ēahtnes = ēhtnes

eahtoða ‘_eighth_,’ _Men_; #Chr#.

±eahtung f. _estimation, valuation_, CP: _deliberation, counsel_.

eal == eall, æl

eala == ealu

ēalā interj. _alas! oh! lo!_ Æ, AO, CP. [ēa II.]

ēalād f. _watery way_, #An# 441.

ēaland n. _island_, _Chr_.

ealað v. ealu.

ealbeorht = eallbeorht

ēalc = ǣlc

eald (a) comp. ieldra, yldra; sup. ieldest, yldest _‘old,’ aged,
ancient, antique_, _Æ, B, CP_; AO: _experienced, tried_: _honoured,
eminent, great_. ðā ieldstan men _the chief men_.

ealda m. _old man_, RHy 6^25: _the Devil_.

ealdbacen _stale_, LL (360^27).

eald-cȳðð (AO), cȳððu f. _old home, former dwelling-place_: _old
acquaintance_, Æ.

ealddagas mp. _former times_, AO.

ealddōm m. _age_, AO.

ealde = ielde

ealdefæder m. _grandfather_.

ealdemōdor f. _grandmother_.

ealder = ealdor

ealdfæder m. _forefather_, _Æ_. [‘_eldfather_’]

ealdfēond (ī) † m. _old foe, hereditary foe, the devil_.

ealdgecynd † n. _original nature_.

ealdgefā m. _ancient foe_, AO 118^34.

ealdgefēra m. _old comrade_, AO 152^24.

ealdgenēat m. _old comrade_, #Ma# 310.

ealdgenīðla † m. _old foe, Satan_.

ealdgeriht (a^1) n. _ancient right_, Ct.

ealdgesegen f. _ancient tradition_, B 869.

ealdgesīð † m. _old comrade_.

ealdgestrēon n. _ancient treasure_, AO.

ealdgeweorc † n. _old-standing work, the world_.

ealdgewinn n. _old-time conflict_, B 1781.

ealdgewinna m. _old enemy_, B 1776.

ealdgewyrht † n. _former deeds_: _deserts of former deeds_? _traditional
usage_? B 2657.

ealdhettende mp. _old foes_, #Jud# 321.

ealdhlāford m. _hereditary lord_, AO, CP.

ealdhrīðer? n. _an old ox_.

±ealdian (a) _to grow old_, _Jn_; Æ. [‘_eld_,’ ‘_old_’]

ealdland n. _land which has been long untilled_? (BT), _ancestral
property_? (Earle), EC 327^14.

ealdlandrǣden f. _established law of landed property_, LL 448[4,6] (or ?
two words, BT).

ealdlic _old, venerable_, Æ.

ealdnes f. _old age_, _Æ_. [‘_eldness_,’ ‘_oldness_’]

ealdor (a) I. m. _elder, parent_, _BH, Gen_. pl. _ancestors_: _civil or
religious authority, chief, leader, master, lord, prince, king_, Æ:
_source_: _primitive_, #ÆGr#. [eald; ‘_alder_’] II. n(f?) (†) _life,
vital part_: (†) _age, old age_: _eternity_. on ealdre tō ealdre _for
ever, always_. āwa tō ealdre, tō widan ealdre _for ever and ever_.
[_Ger._ alter]

ealdorapostol (a) m. _chief apostle_, BH 314^7.

ealdorbana (a^1) m. _life-destroyer_, #Gen# 1033.

ealdorbealu † n. _life-bale, death_.

ealdorbiscop m. _chief bishop, archbishop_, Æ: _high-priest_, Æ.

ealdor-bold, -botl n. _palace, mansion_, BH.

ealdorburg f. _metropolis_.

ealdorcearu (a^1) f. _great sorrow_, B 906.

ealdordæg † m. _day of life_.

ealdordēma (a^1) †m. _chief judge, prince_.

ealdordeofol m. _chief of the devils_, NC 282.

ealdordōm m. _power, lordship, rule, dominion, authority, magistracy_,
_PPs_; Æ, AO, CP: _superiority, preeminence_: _beginning_? #Jul# 190.
[‘_alderdom_’]

ealdordōmlic ‘_principalis_,’ #EPs#.

ealdordōmscipe? m. _office of alderman_, #Chr# 983#c#.

ealdorduguð † f. _nobility, flower of the chiefs_.

ealdorfrēa (a^1) m. _lord, chief_, #Da# 46.

ealdorgeard m. _enclosure of life, body_, #An# 1183? (or ? ēador-)

ealdorgedāl † n. _death_.

ealdorgesceaft f. _state of life_, #Rd# 40^23.

ealdorgewinna † m. _deadly enemy_.

ealdorlang _life-long, eternal_, †#Chr# 937#a#.

ealdorlēas I. _lifeless, dead_, B 15. II. _deprived of parents,
orphaned_: _without a chief_.

ealdorlegu † f. _destiny_: _death_.

ealdorlic _‘principalis,’ chief, princely, excellent_: _authentic_. adv.
-līce.

ealdorlicnes f. _authority_, CP.

ealdormann (o^3) [v. LL 2·359] m. _‘alderman,’ ruler, prince, chief,
nobleman of the highest rank, high civil or religious officer, chief
officer of a shire_, _Chr_; Æ, AO, CP: as trans. of foreign titles,
_JnL, Mt_.

ealdorneru † f. _life’s preservation, safety, refuge_.

ealdorsācerd m. _high priest_.

ealdorscipe m. _seniority, headship, supremacy, sovereignty_, Æ.

ealdorstōl m. _throne_, #Rim# 23.

ealdorðegn † m. _chief attendant, retainer, distinguished courtier,
chieftain_.

ealdorwisa (a^1) m. _chief_, #Gen# 1237.

ealdoð (ald-aht, -ot) _vessel_, #Gl#.

ealdriht n. _old right_.

Eald-Seaxe -Seaxan mp. _Old-Saxons, Continental Saxons_, AO.

ealdspell n. _old saying, old story_.

ealdsprǣc f. _proverb, by-word_, #PPs# 43^15.

ealdung f. _process of growing old, age_, Æ, AO.

ealdur == ealdor

ealdwērig? _accursed from old times_, #Ex# 50.

ealdwīf n. _old woman_, Æ.

ealdwita m. _venerable man, priest, sage_: _Pharisee_.

ealdwrītere m. _writer on ancient history_, OEG 5449.

ēales v. ealh.

ealfara m. _pack-horse_? A 4·147^200 (v. NC 282, 342).

ealfela † _very much_.

ealfelo _baleful, dire_, #An# 771 (ælfælo), #Rd# 24^9.

ealgearo † _all ready, prepared_.

±ealgian _to protect, defend_, Æ.

ealgodwebb n. _‘holosericus,’ all-silk cloth_, WW 395^15.

ealgodwebben _all-silk_, WW.

ealh (a) † m., gs. ēales _temple_.

ealhstede † m. _temple_.

ēalifer f. _liver-wort_? _Lcd_. [‘_eileber_’?]

ēalīðend m. _seafaring man_, #An# 251.

eall I. adj. (has no weak form) _‘all,’ every, entire, whole,
universal_, _Æ, Chr, Mt_. pl. _all men_, _Æ_. II. adv. _fully, wholly,
entirely, quite_, _Cr, GD, Gen_. e. swā _quite as, just as_. e. swā
micle swā _as much as_. mid e. mid eallum _altogether, entirely_. ealra
swīðost _especially, most of all_. ealne weg (also contr. ealneg)
_always_. ofer e. (neut.) _everywhere, into all parts_. III. n. _all,
everything_.

ealla = gealla

eallbeorht † _all-bright, resplendent_.

eallbyrnende _burning all over_, Æ.

eallcræftig † (æl-) _all powerful_.

ealldryge _completely dry_, Æ.

eallencten m. _season of Lent_, RB 66^5.

eallenga = eallunga

ealles, ealle adv. (g. of eall) _entirely, wholly, fully, quite_. e. for
swīðe _altogether, utterly_.

eallgelēaflic _universally believed, catholic_.

eallgōd _all-good_, Æ.

eallgrēne † _all-green, green_.

eallgylden _all-golden_, CP (æl-).

eallhālig _all-holy_, #PPs# 131^8.

eallhwīt _entirely of white_, Ct.

eallic _universal, catholic_.

eallinga = eallunga

eallīren _entirely of iron_, B 2338.

eallīsig _all-icy, very cold_.

eallmægen † n. _utmost effort_.

eallmǣst (al-, æl-) adv. _nearly all_, _‘almost,’ for the most part_,
_Æ, Chr_.

eallmiht f. _omnipotence_, #PPs# 135^12.

eallmihtig = ælmihtig

eallnacod _entirely naked_, #Gen# 871.

eallneg = ealneg

eallnīwe _quite new_, Æ.

eallnunge = eallunga

ealloffrung f. _holocaust_, WW 130^12 (eal-).

eallreord = elreord

eallrihte adv. _just, exactly_, RB 131^13.

eallseolcen _entirely made of silk_, #Gl#.

eallswā _just as, even as_, _‘as,’ as if, so as, likewise_, _Æ, Mt_.

eallswilc _just such_, Æ.

ealltela adv. _quite well_, #Gen# 1905.

eallunga adv. _altogether, entirely, utterly, quite, indeed_, _Æ, Mt_;
CP. [‘_allinge_’]

eallwealda † I. _all-ruling, almighty_. II. m. _God, the Almighty_.

eallwealdend m. _ruler of all_, Æ.

eallwealdende _‘all-wielding,’ all ruling_, _Æ_.

eallwihta † fp. _all creatures_.

eallwriten adj. _holograph_, WW 463^28.

eallwundor n. _marvel_, #Ex# 578.

ealm- = eallm-

ealmihtig = ælmihtig

ealneg (AO, CP), ealneweg, ealnuweg, ealnig, ealning(a) _always, quite,
perpetually_.

ealnunga = eallunga

ealo == ealu

ealoffrung f. _holocaust_, WW 130^12.

ealogeweorc n. _brewing_, AO 222^7.

ēalond = ēaland

ealoð (AO) v. ealu.

ealowōsa m. _ale-tippler_, #Wy# 49.

ealsealf f. _‘ambrosia,’ an aromatic plant_.

ealswā = eallswā

ealtēawe = æltǣwe

ealu (ealo) m? n? gds. ealoð (AO), ealað; gp. ealeða _‘ale,’ beer_,
_Lcd_; Æ. [v. A 27·495]

ealubenc † f. ‘_ale-bench_,’ _B_.

ealuclyfa m. _beer-cellar_, OEG 4^42.

ealufæt n. _ale-vat_, #Lcd# 53b.

ealugafol n. _tax or tribute paid in ale_, LL 448.

ealugāl _drunk with ale_, #Gen# 2408.

ealugālnes f. _drunkenness_, NC 282.

ealuhūs (a^2) n. _alehouse_, LL 228[1,2].

ealumalt (alo-) n. _malt for brewing_, #Lcd# 157a.

ealuscerwen f. _bitter drink_? (BT), _(ale-spilling), mortal panic_?
(Earle), B 770.

ealuscop m. _singer in alehouses_, LL.

ealuwǣge † n. _ale-flagon, ale-can_.

ealw- = eallw-

eam (#VPs#) = eom (v. wesan)

ēam I. m. _uncle_ (usu. maternal; paternal uncle = fædera), AO.
[‘_eme_’; _Ger._ oheim] II. dp. of ēa.

+ēan _yeaning_, Æ.

±ēanian _to bring forth young_ (usu. lambs), _Ps_ 77^71. [‘_ean_’]

ēaōfer m. _river-bank_, #Met# 19^22.

eapel, eapl = æppel

eappul- = æppel-

ear _‘occa,’ harrow_? OEG 2359 (v. A 36·72).

ēar I. n. _‘ear’ (of corn)_, _Mt_; AO. II. † m. _wave, sea, ocean_.
III. † m. _earth_: _name of the rune for =ēa=_. IV. = ǣr. V. = ēare

ēaracu f. _river bed_, KC 5·122^15.

earan- = earon

earb- = earf-

ēarblæd (ē^1) n. _stalk, blade (of corn)_, _straw_.

earc, earce (a, æ, e) f. _chest, coffer_, _Rd_: ‘_ark_,’ _Mt, Ps_; CP.
[_L._]

ēarclǣnsend m. _little finger_, WW 265^1.

earcnanstān = eorcnanstān

ēarcoðu f. _‘parotis,’ a tumour near the ears_, WW 113^31.

eard m. _native place, country, region, dwelling-place, estate,
cultivated ground_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP: _earth, land_: _condition, fate_,
†_Hy_. [‘_erd_’]

eardbegenga m. _inhabitant_, #LPs#.

eardbegengnes f. _habitation_, #RLPs#.

eardcyððo f. _old acquaintance_ (eald-?).

eardeswræcca (#LPs# 118^19) = eardwrecca

eardfæst _settled, abiding_, AO.

eardgeard † m. _place of habitation, world_.

eardgyfu † f. _gift from one’s native place_.

±eardian tr. and intr. _to inhabit, dwell, abide, live_, _AO, B_; Æ, CP.
[‘_erde_’]

eardiend m. _dweller_, GD.

eardiendlic _habitable_, BH 366^10.

eardland n. _native land_, #PPs# 134^12.

eardlufe f. _dear home_? B 693.

eardrīce n. _habitation_, #Gu# 825.

eardstapa m. _wanderer_, #Wa# 6.

eardstede m. _habitation_, #Ph# 195.

±eardung f. _dwelling-abode, tabernacle_.

eardungburg f. _city of habitation_.

eardunghūs n. _tabernacle, habitation_.

eardungstōw f. _habitation, dwelling-place, tabernacle_, CP.

eardweall m. _land-rampart, bulwark_, B 1224?

eardwīc † n. _dwelling_.

eardwrecca m. _exile_, LL 51n5.

eardwunung f. _dwelling in one’s own country_, W 120^13.

ēare n. ‘_ear_,’ _Mt, Rd, VPs_; Æ, CP. [_Goth._ ausō]

ēarede _having a handle_, WW 122^39.

ēarefinger m. _little finger_, WW.

ēarelipprica = ēarliprica

earendel (eo) m. _dayspring, dawn, ray of light_.

earfað- = earfoð-

earfe f? _tare_. [_L._ ervum]

earfed- = (1) earfoð-; (2) yrfe-

earfeð == earfoð

ēarfinger = ēarefinger

earfod- = earfoð-

earfoð I. n. _hardship, labour, trouble, difficulty, suffering, torment,
torture_, AO, CP. [_Ger._ arbeit] II. adj. _hard, difficult,
troublesome_, _Æ, Bo_. [‘_arveth_’]

earfoðcierre (að-) _hard to convert_, MH 112^20.

earfoðcwide m. _hard or dark saying_, Æ.

earfoðcynn n. _depraved race_, #PPs# 77^10.

earfoðdǣde _difficult_, CP 147^12.

earfoðdæg † m. _day of tribulation_.

earfoðe I. (Æ, CP) = earfoð. II. adv. _with difficulty_.

earfoðfēre _difficult to pass through_, AS 44^7.

earfoðfynde _hard to find_, Æ. [cp. ēaðfynde]

earfoðhāwe _difficult to be seen_.

earfoðhwīl f. _hard time_, #Seaf# 3.

earfoðhylde _evil-disposed, obstinate_, ÆH 1·400^1.

±earfoðian _to trouble_, #Ps#.

earfoðlǣre _hard to teach_, GD 110^19.

earfoðlǣte _hard to discharge_, WW 113^20.

earfoðlic _difficult, full of hardship_, _Æ_. [‘_arvethlich_’] adv.
-līce _with difficulty, painfully, reluctantly, hardly, scarcely_, _Mt_.
[‘_arvethliche_’]

earfoðlicnes (Æ) = earfoðnes

earfoðmæcg † m. _sufferer_.

earfoðnes f. _difficulty, hardship, trouble, affliction, pain,
misfortune_, _Æ_. [‘_arvethness_’]

earfoðrecce _hard to relate_, W 22^14.

earfoðrihte _hard to correct_, NC 283.

earfoðrīme _hard to enumerate_.

earfoðsǣlig _unhappy, unfortunate_, #Cra# 8.

earfoðsīð † m. _troublesome journey_: _misfortune_.

earfoðtǣcne _difficult to be shown_, #Met# 20^147.

earfoððrāg f. _sorrowful time_, B 283.

earfoðwylde _hard to subdue_, #Lcd# 3·436^12.

earg (earh) _slothful, sluggish_, _Gn_: _cowardly_, _BH_; AO: _craven,
vile, wretched, useless_, _MtL_. [‘_argh_’; _Ger._ arg] adv. earge.

eargēat = earngēat  [[under “earngēap”]]

ēargebland † n. _wave-blend, surge_.

ēargespeca m. _whisperer, privy councillor_, WW 351^2. [= -spreca]

eargfaru † f. _shower of arrows_.

±eargian (i, y) _to shun, fear, turn coward_, Æ: _terrify_.

earglic _slothful, shameful, bad_, Æ. adv. -līce.

eargnes (arog-) f. _licentiousness_, MkR 8^38.

ēargrund m. _bottom of the sea_, #Az# 40.

eargscipe m. _idleness, cowardice_: _profligacy_.

earh I. f. ‘_arrow_,’ _LL_; #An#. II. == earg

ēarhring m. ‘_ear-ring_,’ _Æ_.

ēarisc (ēo) f. _rush, reed, flag_. [ēa]

ēarīð m. _water-stream_, #Guth# 20^5.

ēarlæppa m. _external ear_, WW.

ēarliprica m. _flap of the ear, external ear_, NG.

ēarlocc m. _lock of hair over the ear_, WW 152^30.

earm (a) I. m. ‘_arm_’ (of the body, sea, etc.), _AO, LkL_: _foreleg_,
Æ: _power_, _Jn_. II. _poor, wretched, pitiful, destitute, miserable_,
_Mk_; Æ, CP. [‘_arm_’; _Ger._ arm]

earm-bēag, -bēah m. _bracelet_.

earmcearig † _full of sorrows_.

earme adv. _miserably, badly_.

earmella m. _sleeve_, RB 136^23.

earmful _wretched, miserable_, #Lcd# 3·440´.

earmgegirela m. _bracelet_, WW 386^13.

earmheort _humble, poor in spirit_, CP 209^2: _tender-hearted,
merciful_.

earmhrēad f. _arm-ornament_, B 1194.

earmian _to pity, commiserate_.

earming m. _poor wretch_, Æ. [‘_arming_’]

earmlic _miserable, pitiable, mean_, _Met_. adv. -līce. [‘_armlich(e)_’]

earmscanca m. _arm-bone_, LL 82[55].

earmsceapen _wretched, unfortunate, miserable_.

earmslīfe f. _sleeve_, RBL 93^9.

earmstoc m? _sleeve_, IM 128^110.

earmstrang _strong of arm, muscular_, WW 158^7.

earmswīð _strong of arm, muscular_, WW 435^33.

earmðu f. _misery, poverty_, _Bo_. [‘_armthe_’]

earn I. m. _eagle_, _El, Mt_; Æ. [‘_erne_’] II. = ærn. III. = arn
(v. iernan)

earnan (#VPs#) = ærnan

earncynn n. _eagle tribe_.

earn-gēap (v. AB 19·164), -gēat, -gēot f. _vulture_, #Gl#.

±earnian (a) (w. g. a.) _to ‘earn,’ merit, win_: _labour for_, _Bo, Gu_.

earningland n. _land earned or made freehold_ (= bōcland; BT), Ct.

earnung f. _merit, reward, consideration, pay_, Æ: _labour_.

earo = gearo

earon (#VPs#) = sindon pres. 3 pl. of eom (v. wesan).

ēaron = gēarum dp. of gēar.

earp _dark, dusky_, #Rd# 4^42. [_ON._ jarpr]

earpa = hearpa  [[form of “hearpe”?]]

ēarplætt m. _box or blow on the ear_, Æ.

±ēarplættan _to box the ears_, Æ.

ēar-prēon, -ring m. _ear-ring_, Æ.

earre (N) = ierre

ears (æ) m. _posterior, fundament, buttocks_, _Æ_. [‘_arse_’]

ear-scripel, -scrypel (eo^1, y^2) m. _little finger_, #Gl#.

ēarsealf f. _ear-salve_, #Lcd#.

earsendu np. _buttocks_, WW.

earsgang (ars-) m. _privy_: _excrement_: ‘_anus_.’

ēarslege m. _a blow that strikes off an ear_, LL 20[46].

earsling _backwards_, _Ps_. [‘_arselings_’]

earslȳra? m? _buttocks, breech_, Æ. [līra]

earsode ‘_tergosus_,’ _WW_. [‘_arsed_’]

ēarspinl f. _ear-ring_, #Gl#.

earsðerl n. ‘_anus_,’ WW 160^1.

eart 2 sg. of eom pres. of wesan.

earð I. == yrð. II. = eart

ēarðan = ǣr ðam (v. ǣr II.)

earðe (N) = eorðe

ēarðyrel n. _‘fistula, arteria,’ ear-passage_? (BT), WW 238^29. [or =
ears-ðyrel, -ðerl?]

earu = gearu

earun (#VPs#) = earon

ēarwærc n. _ear-ache_, #Lcd# 14b.

ēarwicga m. ‘_earwig_,’ _Lcd, WW_.

earwunga _for nothing, gratuitously_: _without a cause_.

ēas v. ēa.

ease _‘caucale,’ an umbelliferous plant, wild carrot_? WW 202^1.

ēaspring = ǣspryng

ēast I. adj. comp. ēast(er)ra, sup. ēastmest, ēastemest _east,
easterly_. II. adv. _eastwards, in an easterly direction, in the east_,
_BH, Met_; AO. [‘_east_’]

ēastæð n. _river-bank, sea-shore_, #Ma# 63.

ēastan, ēastane _from the east, easterly_, _AO_. [‘_east_’]

ēastannorðan _from the north-east_, WW.

ēastannorðanwind m. _north-east wind_, WW 364^5.

ēastansūðan _from the south-east_, WW 3^4.

ēastansūðanwind m. _south-east wind_, WW 144^3.

ēastanwind (e^2) m. ‘_east wind_,’ WW 143^36.

ēastcyning m. _eastern king_, AO 148^35.

ēastdǣl m. _eastern quarter, the East_, AO.

ēaste f. _the East_.

ēastemest (AO) v. ēast.

ēastende m. _east-end, east quarter_, AO.

ēastene = ēastane  [[under “ēastan”]]

Eastengle mpl. _the East-Anglians_: _East Anglia_.

ēasterǣfen m. _Easter-eve_, BH.

ēasterdæg m. _Easter-day, Easter Sunday, day of the Passover_, Æ. on
ōðran Easter-dæge _on Easter Monday_, #Chr# 1053#c#.

ēasterfæsten n. _Easter-fast, Lent_.

ēasterfeorm f. _feast of Easter_, LL.

ēasterfrēolsdæg m. _the feast day of the Passover_, Jn 13^1.

Ēastergewuna m. _Easter custom_, ÆL 23b^643.

ēasterlic _belonging to Easter, Paschal_, _Lk_. [‘_Easterly_’]

ēastermōnað m. _Easter-month, April_.

easterne _east_, _‘eastern,’ oriental_, _Gen, WW_; Æ.

ēasterniht f. _Easter-eve_, #Hell# 15; MP 1·611.

ēasterra v. ēast.

Ēastersunnandæg (tor) m. _Easter Sunday_.

ēastersymbel (tro) n. _Passover_.

eastertīd f. _Easter-tide, Paschal season_, Æ.

ēasterðēnung f. _Passover_, Mt 26^19.

ēasterwucu f. _Easter-week_.

ēasteð = ēastæð

ēasteweard (e^2) _east, ‘eastward,’_ _Mt_.

ēastfolc n. _eastern nation_, WW 396^30.

ēastgārsecg m. _eastern ocean_, AO 132^29.

ēastgemǣre n. _eastern confines_, AO 132^29.

ēasthealf f. _east side_, #Chr# 894#a#.

ēastland n. _the East_, _Æ_: _Esthonia_, AO. [‘_Eastland_’]

ēastlang _to the east, eastwards, extending east_, #Chr# 893#a#.

ēastlēode mp. _Orientals_, BH.

ēastmest v. ēast.

ēastnorð _north-easterly_, AO.

ēastnorðerne _north-east_.

ēastnorðwind m. _north-east wind_, #Gl#.

ēastor- = ēaster-

ēastportic n. _eastern porch_, Æ.

ēastra v. ēast.

ēastre (usu. in pl. ēastron, -an; gs. -es in N.) f. ‘_Easter_,’ _BH,
WW_: _Passover_, _Bl, Mk_: _spring_.

ēastrēam m. _stream, river_, #Da# 385.

+ēastrian _to elapse (during Easter)_, W 208^24.

ēastrīce n. _eastern kingdom, eastern country, empire_: _the east_, Æ,
AO: _East Anglia_.

ēastrihte _due east, eastwards_, AO 17^14 (y).

ēastrihtes (ēst-) _due east_.

ēastro, ēastru = ēastre

ēastro- = ēaster-

ēastrodor m. _eastern part of the sky_, #PPs# 102^12.

ēastron dp. of ēaster.  [[headword spelled “ēastre”]]

ēastsǣ f. _east sea_.

East-Seaxan, -Seaxe mpl. _East-Saxons_, _people of Essex_: _Essex_.

ēaststæð n. _east bank of a stream_, Ct.

ēastsūð _south-eastwards_, AO. be ēastsūðan _to the south-east_.

ēastsūðdǣl m. _south-east part_, BH 264^22.

ēastsūðlang _from east to south_, AO 22^17.

ēastðēod f. _an eastern people_.

ēast-weard, -werd _east, ‘eastward,’_ _Ct, Mt_.

ēastweardes _eastwards_, Æ.

ēastweg † m. _path in or from the east_.

eata (N) = eta imperat. of etan.

eatan = etan

eatol = atol

ēað (ē, ȳ) = (1) ēaðe, (2) īeð

ēað-bede, -bēne _easy to be entreated_, #Ps#.

ēaðbe-gēate, -gēte _easy to get_.

ēaðbylgnes f. _irritability_, NC 288.

ēaðbylig (y^1, e^2) _easily irritated_, W 253^11.

ēaðcnǣwe _easy to recognise_, #ÆGr# 147^8.

ēaðdǣde (ȳ) _easy to do_.

ēaðe (ē, ēo) I. _easy, smooth, agreeable, kindly_. II. adv. _easily,
lightly, soon_, Æ, AO, CP: _willingly, readily_, Æ. ē. mæg _perhaps,
lest_. III. n. _an easy thing_.

ēaðelic _easy, possible_, _Mt_: _insignificant, scanty, slight_, _BH_
(ǣ); Æ. [‘_eathly_’] adv. -līce (_Lk_).

ēaðelicnes (ēð-) f. _easiness_, WW 400^39.

ēaðfēre _easy for travelling over_, WW 146^29.

ēaðfynde (ē, ȳ) † _easy to find_.

ēaðgeorn (ēð-) _easily pleased_, WW 218^16.

ēaðgesȳne (e^1, y^1, ē^3) † _easily seen, visible_.

ēað-gēte, -gēate _easy to obtain, prepared, ready_, Æ.

ēaðhrēðig = ēadhrēðig

ēaðhylde _contented, satisfied_, RB.

ēað-lǣce (ā^2), -lǣcne _easy to cure_.

ēaðlǣre (ēad-) _capable of being taught, instructed_.

±ēaðmēdan, -mēdian _to humble, humble oneself, prostrate oneself,
adore_.

ēaðmēde = (1) ēaðmōd, (2) ēaðmēdu

ēaðmēdlīce (ēad-) _humbly_.

ēaðmēdu, -mēdo (#Chr#) f. _gentleness, humility_, _Ps_: _obedience,
submission, reverence_: _goodwill_. _kindness, affability_. [‘_edmede_’]

ēaðmēdum _humbly, kindly_.

ēaðmelte = ēaðmylte

ēað-mēttu, -mētto np. _humility, weakness, impotency_, CP.

ēað-mōd (CP), -mēde _humble-minded, gentle, obedient_, _Ps_:
_benevolent, friendly, affectionate, gracious_. [‘_edmede_’]

±ēaðmōdian _to humble or submit oneself, obey_: (+) _condescend_: (+)
_adore, worship_.

ēaðmōdig == ēaðmōd

ēaðmōdlic _humble, respectful_, CP. adv. _humbly, meekly_, CP: _kindly_.

ēaðmōdnes f. _humility, meekness, condescension_, _Bo_ (ēad-).
[‘_edmodness_’]

ēaðmylte _easily digested_, #Lcd#.

ēaðnes f. _easiness, lightness, facility, ease_: _gentleness_.

ēaðrǣde (ēð-) _easy to guess_, ES 36·326.

ēaðwylte (ēð-) _easily turned_, OEG 1151.

ēaum dp. of ēa.

ēaw = (1) ēa; (2) ēow V.; (3) ǣ(w).

ēawan = īewan

ēawdnes f. _‘ostensio,’ disclosure_, LL 412[3].

ēawenga (AO) = ēawunga

ēawesc- = ēawisc-

ēawfæst == ǣwfæst

ēawian = īewan

ēawisclic _manifest, open_. adv. -līce.

ēawisfirina = ǣwiscfirina  [[under “ǣwiscferinend”]]

ēawlā = ēalā

ēawu = ēowu

ēawunga (CP, Æ), ēawunge (LG) adv. _openly, plainly, publicly_. [īewan]

ēawyrt f. _river-wort, burdock_, #Lcd#.

eax (æ) I. f. _axis, axle, axle-tree_. II. = æcs

eaxelgespann n. _place where the two beams of a cross intersect_,
#Rood# 9.

eaxl, eaxel f. _shoulder_, Æ.

eaxlclāð m. _scapular_, Æ.

eaxle = eaxl

eaxlgestealla † m. _shoulder-companion, comrade, counsellor_:
_competitor_? (BT).

eb- = ef-, eof-

ēb- = ǣb-

ebba (æ) m. _‘ebb’, low tide_, _Ma_.

±ebbian _to ‘ebb,’_ _Gen_.

ebbind (ēbind) ‘_tenacitas ventris_,’ Ln 33^6. [_ON._ abbendi]

ebol- (N) = yfel-

Ebrēisc (e, i) _Hebrew_, _A, Jn_. [‘_Hebreish_’]

ēc = ēac

ēca wk. m. form of ēce adj.

ēcambe = ācumbe  [[under “ācumba”]]

ēcan = īecan

ēccelic = ēcelic

ece (æ) m. _‘ache,’ pain_, _BH, Lcd_; Æ. [acan]

ēce _perpetual, eternal, everlasting_, _OET, VPs_; Æ, CP. adv.
_eternally, ever, evermore_. [‘_eche_’]

eced (æ) mn. _acid, vinegar_, Æ. [_L._ acētum]

eceddrenc m. _acid drink_, #Lcd#.

ecedfæt n. _vinegar-vessel_, #Gl#.

ēcelic _eternal, everlasting_. adv. -līce _VPs_. [‘_echliche_’]

ēcen = ēacen

ecer = æcer

ēcere gfs. of ēce adj.

ecg f. _‘edge,’ point_, _B, Lk_; Æ, CP; Mdf: (†) _weapon, sword,
battle-axe_, _B_.

ecgan _to sharpen_: _harrow_, _Cp_. [‘_edge_’]

ecgbana † m. _slayer with the sword, murderer_.

ecgheard _hard of edge_, #An# 1183.

ecghete † m. _sword-hatred, war_.

ecglāst mf. _sword’s edge_.

ecgplega m. _battle_, #Jud# 246.

ecgðracu f. _hot contest_, B 596.

ecgung f. _harrowing_, WW 104^12.

ecgwæl n. _sword-slaughter_, #Gen# 2089.

ēcilm- (M) = ǣcelm-

eclinga (= ecgl-) _on the edge_, IM.

ēcnes f. _eternity_, _VPs_. ā on ēcnesse _for ever and ever_.
[‘_echeness_’]

ēcre dfs. of ēce.

ēcsōð, ēcsōðlīce (NG) _verily_.

ed- prefix, denotes _repetition, turning_.

ēd- = ēað-

+edbyrdan _to regenerate_, #Soul# 100.

edcēlnes f. _a becoming cool again_, #VPs# 65^11 (oe).

+edcennan _to regenerate, create_.

edcenning f. _regeneration_.

+edcīegan (ē^2) _to recall_, #LPs# 101^25.

edcierr (e, i, y) m. _return_, CP.

+edcucoda (ea^1) m. _man restored to life_, Æ.

edcwic _regenerate, restored to life_, CM 499.

±edcwician (cwyc-, cuc-) _to re-quicken, revive_, Æ.

edcwide (eð-) m. _relation, narrative_, WW 43.

edcynn- = edcenn-

edcyrr = edcierr

ēde = ēowde

eder == eodor

edesc = edisc

+edfrēolsian _to re-grant by charter_, EC 197n.

edgeong † _becoming or being young again_.

edgift f. _restitution_, TC 202^33.

edgrōwung f. _growing again_, WW 149^21.

edgung = edgeong

edgyldan^2 (= ie) _to remunerate_, #Sc# 162^11.

edgyldend m. _remunerator_, #Sc# 127^17.

+edhīwian _to shape, conform, reform_.

edhwyrfan _to return, retrace one’s steps_.

+edhyrtan _to refresh, recruit_, GPH 390.

+edhyspol? (+edyppol) ‘_recensendus_,’ GPH 396 (v. ES 38·17).

edhwyrft m. _change, going back (to a former state of things)_,
_reverse_.

edisc m. _enclosed pasture, park_, _Gl, Ps_; Mdf. [v. ‘_eddish_’]

edischenn f. _quail_, _VPs_.

ediscweard m. _park-keeper, gardener_, #Gl#.

ediung = edgeong

±edlǣcan _to repeat, renew_, ÆL.

edlǣcung f. _repetition_, LL (416^42).

edlǣht pp. of edlǣcan.

edlæs- = edles-

+edlæstan _to repeat_, ANS 84·6.

edlēan n. _reward, retribution, recompense, requital_, _Bo_; Æ, CP.
[‘_edlen_’]

±edlēanian _to reward, recompense_.

±edlēaniend m. _rewarder_.

±edlēanung f. _recompense, remuneration, retribution_, #Gl#.

edlēc- = edlǣc-

±edlesende _reciprocal, relative_, #ÆGr#.

edlesendlic _relative, reciprocal_. adv. -līce.

edlesung (æ^2, y^2) f. _relation, relating_, #ÆGr#.

edmǣle (ē) n. _religious festival_, WW 45^9.

edmēltid f. _festival time_, TC 158^20.

ēdmōd = ēaðmōd

ednēow- = ednīw-

ednīwan adv. _anew, again_.

ednīwe I. _renewed, new_, Æ. II. adv. _anew, again_, Æ.

±ednīwian (ēo) _to renew, restore, reform_, Æ.

ednīwigend m. _restorer_, A 11·115^9.

ednīwinga (ēo^2) _anew, again_.

±ednīwung f. _renewal, reparation, renovation_, Æ, CP.

ēdo (NG) = ēowde

edor == eodor

ēdr- (A) = ǣdr-

edrec = edroc

edreccan _to chew, ruminate_, WW 533^38. [= eodorcan; cp. edrocian]

edric = edroc

edrine = edryne

edring f. _refuge_? #Soul# 107.

edroc m. _gullet_, #Gl#: _rumination_, #Gl#.

edrocian _to ruminate_.

edryne m. _coming again, return, meeting_, #REPs# 18^7.

edsceaft f. _new creation, regeneration_.

edsihð (etsith) f. _looking again, respect_, WW 43^33.

+edstalian _to restore_, A 13·366^15.

±edstaðelian _to re-establish, restore_, Æ.

edstaðelig _renewed in strength_.

±edstaðeligend m. _restorer_, Æ.

edstaðelung f. _re-establishment, renewal_, Æ.

edstaðol- = edstaðel-

edðingung f. _reconciliation_, WW 172^40.

+edðrāwen ‘_retortus_,’ OEG 1062.

ēdulfstæf = ēðelstæf

ed-walle, -welle = edwielle

edwendan _to return_, #RPs# 77^39.

ed-wenden, † -wend f. _change, reversal, end_.

edwīd == edwīt

edwielle (a, e, i) f. _eddy, vortex, whirlpool_.

edwihte? _something, anything_, #Gen# 1954.

edwille = edwielle

ed-winde, -wind f. _‘vortex,’ whirlpool_, #Gl#.

edwist f. _being, substance_, Æ: _sustenance, food_.

+edwistian _to feed, support_, #LPs# 22^2.

edwistlic _existing, substantive_, #ÆGr# 201^8.

edwīt n. _reproach, shame, disgrace, scorn, abuse_, _Ps_; AO, CP.
[‘_edwit_’]

edwītan^1 _to reproach_, _VPs_. [‘_edwite_’]

edwītful _disgraceful_, #Gl#. adv. -līce.

edwītian = edwītan

edwītlīf n. _life of dishonour_, B 2891.

edwītscipe m. _disgrace, shame_, #Wald# 1^14.

edwītsprǣc † f. _scorn_.

edwītspreca m. _scoffer_, #Gu# 418.

edwītstæf † m. _reproach, disgrace_.

edwylm m. _whirlpool of fire_, #Whale# 73.

±edwyrpan _to amend, become better, recover, revive_.

edwyrping f. _recovery_, ÆH 2·26^29.

+edyppol v. +edhyspol.

efe- = efen-

efen (æfen, efn, emn) I. adj. _‘even,’ equal, like, level_, _AO_: _just,
true_, _Æ_: _calm, harmonious, equable_, _CP_. on efen v. onemn. II.
adv. _evenly_, _Æ, Ps_: _equally_, _Bo_: _exactly, just as_, _B, Cr_:
_quite, fully_, _CP, Gen_: _namely_, _Gu, Met_.

efen- often = _L._ con-.

ēfen n. = ǣfen

efenæðele _equally noble_.

efenāmetan = efenmetan

efenapostol (efn(e)-) m. _fellow-apostle_.

efenbehēfe (efn-) _equally useful or needful_, #Met# 12^7.

efenbeorht † _equally bright_.

efenbisceop (-cop) m. _co-bishop_, BH 112^27.

efenblissian _to rejoice equally_.

efenblīðe _rejoicing with another_, MH 28^8.

efenboren _of equal birth_, LL (256^38).

efenbrād _as broad as long_, ES 8·477.

efenbyrde _of equal birth_, ÆL 33^3.

efenceasterwaran mp. _fellow-citizens_, BH 62^20; GD 205^1.

efencempa m. _fellow-soldier_, Æ.

efencrīsten (em-) _fellow-Christian_, LL.

efencuman^4 _to come together, agree_.

efendȳre _equally dear_, LL.

efenēadig _equally blessed_, †Hy 8^21.

efeneald _contemporary, coeval_, _Æ, Wid_. [‘_evenold_’]

efeneardigende _dwelling together_, #Cr# 237.

efenēce † (efn-) _co-eternal_. adv. B.

efenedwistlic _consubstantial_, Æ.

efenēhð f. _neighbourhood_? _neighbouring district_? #Chr# 894#a# (v. BT
Supp.).

efenesne (efne-) m. _fellow-servant_, N.

efenetan _to eat as much as_, #Rd# 41^63.

efenēðe _just as easy_, #Met# 20^167 (efn-).

efenfela (eo^3) num. adj. _just so many, as many_, AO (em-).

efenfrē-fran, -frian ‘_consolare_,’ #EPs# 125^1.

efengedǣlan (efn-) _to share alike_, #Ex# 95.

efengefēon^6 _to rejoice together, sympathise_.

efengelic _like, co-equal_.

efengelīca m. _equal, fellow_.

efengemæcca (efn-) m. _companion, fellow, consort_, CP.

efengemyndig _commemorative_, #Bl# 101^1.

efengespittan ‘_conspuere_,’ MkL 14^65.

efengōd (emn-) _equally good_, #Bo#.

efenhāda m. _an equal in rank, co-bishop_, GD 43^22.

ēfenhālig _equally holy_, #Bl# 45^18.

efenhēafda m. _fellow, comrade_, NC 283.

efenheafodling m. _mate, fellow_.

efenhēah _equally high_.

efenhēap m. _band of comrades_, WW 375^20.

efenhemman? _to fetter_, #EPs# 145^7.

efenheort _concordant, harmonious_.

efenheort(e)? -nes? _concord, harmony_, DR (æfne-).

efenherenes f. _praising together_, #CPs# 32^1.

efenherian _to praise together_, #VPs# 116^1.

efen-hlēoðor ‡ n., -hlēoðrung f. _harmony, union of sounds or voices_.

efenhleoðrian _to sing together_, NC 283.

efenhlȳte (ē^3) _equal in rank_, BH.

efen-hlytta, -hleta m. _sharer, partner_, Æ.

efenīeðe (ē) _just as easy_, #Met# 20^167.

±efenlǣcan _to be like_: _make like, match, imitate_, _Æ_.
[‘_evenleche_’]

efenlǣcend m. _imitator_, Æ.

efenlǣcere m. _imitator_, OEG 1957.

±efenlǣcestre f. _female imitator_.

±efenlǣcung f. _copying, imitation_, Æ.

efenlang (em-) _equally long_: prep. (w. d.) -lange _along_.

efenlāste f. _the herb mercury_, _Lcd_. [‘_evenlesten_’]

efenlēof (em-) _equally dear_, AO.

efenleornere m. _fellow-disciple_, OEG 56^264.

±efenlic _even, equal, comparable to, of like age_, _Cr_. [‘_evenly_’].
adv. -līce _equally, evenly, alike_: _patiently_.

efenlīca (efn-) m. _equal_, #Met# 20^19.

+efenlīcian _to make equal_, BH 372^31: (±) ‘_complacere_,’ #AV^2Ps#
25^3.

efenlīcnes f. _evenness, equality_, _CP, Ps_. (em-). [‘_evenliness_’]

efenling (efn-) m. _consort, fellow_, #EPs# 44^8.

efenmǣre (efn-) _equally famous_, #Met# 10^32.

efenmæsseprēost m. _fellow-priest_, GD 283^3.

efenmedome (efn-) _equally worthy_, MH 134^9.

efenmetan^5 _to assemble together_, #EPs# 61^9: _compare_, #VPs# 48^21.

efenmicel _equally great_.

efenmid adj. _middle_, #PPs# 73^12.

efenmihtig _equally mighty_, W 16^7.

efenmōdlīce _with equanimity_, OEG 2978.

efennēah adv. _equally near_.

efennēhð = efenēhð

efennes f. _equity, justice_: _comparison_.

efen-niht f., -nihte? n. _equinox_ (23 Sep.).

efenrēðe (emn-) _equally fierce_, AO 68^6.

efenrīce _equally powerful_, BH 416^9.

efensācerd m. _fellow-priest_, A 11·7^4.

efensāre (emn-) _equally bitterly_, CP 413^29.

efensārgian _to sorrow together with, commiserate_, Æ.

efensārgung f. _sympathy_, GD 180^8.

efensārig adj. (w. d.) _equally sorry (with)_: _compassionate_.

efenscearp _equally sharp_, #PPs# 63^3.

efenscolere (emn-) m. _fellow-pupil_, AO 132^1.

efenscyldig _equally guilty_, LL.

efensorgian (efn-) _to be sorry for_, GD 345^18.

efenspēdiglic _consubstantial_, BH.

efensprǣc (efne-) _confabulation_, LkL p11^11.

efenstālian _to prepare, make ready, execute_, WW 208^26. [=
*efenstaðelian]

efensung = efesung

efenswīðe (efn-) _just as much_, CP.

efentēam (efne-) m. _conspiracy_, JnL 9^22.

efentōwistlic _consubstantial_.

efenðegn (efne-) m. _fellow-servant_, NG.

ēfenðēnung f. _supper_.

efen-ðēow, -ðēowa m. _fellow-servant_, Æ, CP. -ðēowen f. _fellow-servant
(female)_, HL 18^256.

efenðrōwian _to compassionate, sympathise_, CP (efn-), Æ (em-).

efenðrōwung f. _compassion_, #Sc#.

efenðwǣre _agreeing_, CM 32.

efenunwemme _equally inviolate_, LL 250[14].

efenwǣge f. _counterpoise_, #Gl#.

efenweaxan _to grow together_, #Lcd#.

efenwel _as well_, LL (324^1).

efenweorð _of equal rank_: _very worthy_: _equivalent_.

efenwerod np. _comrades_, WW 381^16.

efenwesende _contemporaneous, co-existent_, #Cr# 350.

efenwiht n. _equal, fellow, associate_.

efenwrītan (emn-) ‘_conscribere_,’ #EPs# 149^9.

efenwyrcend m. _cooperator_, BH 464^25 (æ).

efenwyrhta (em-) m. _fellow-worker_, Æ.

efenwyrðe = efenweorð

efenyrfeweard m. _co-heir_, BH. [ierfe]

efeostlīce (#Chr# 1114#e#) = ofostlīce  [[form of “ofost”]]

efer = eofor

eferfearn = eoforfearn

ēfern (N) = ǣfen

efes, efesc f. _the ‘eaves’ (of a house)_, _LPs_: _brim, brink, edge,
border (of a forest)_, _side_, _Chr_.

efesdrypa = yfesdrype

±efesian _to clip, shear, cut_, _ÆGr_. [‘_evese_’]

efest (#VPs#) = æfest, ofost

efestan = efstan

efestlīce _hurriedly_, NG.

efesung f. _shearing, shaving, tonsure_, _Cp, WW_. [‘_eavesing_’]

efeta (_WW_) m., efete (Æ) f. _‘eft,’ newt, lizard_, Æ.

efgælð (OEG 8^168) = æfgælð

efn == efen

±efnan I. _to make even, level_, _Rd_ 28^8: _liken, compare_, _MtL_.
[‘_even_’; _ON._ jafna] II. = æfnan

efne I. adv. _even, evenly, equally, exactly, indeed, precisely, only,
just, alike, likewise, just now_. e. swā _even so, even as, just as if,
when_. e. swā ðēah _even though_. e. tō _next to_. II. (æ, eo) interj.
_behold! truly! indeed!_ Æ. [efen] III. f? _alum_, Æ. [cp. ælifne] IV.?
(æ) n. _material_, DR.  [[“ælifne” form of “ælifn”?]]

efne- = efen-

efnenū interj. _behold now_, #CLPs# 7^15.

efnes _quite, exactly_.

±efnettan (emn-) _to equal, emulate_: _make even, adjust_: (+)
_compare_.

efnian = efnan I.

efol- = eoful-

efor == eofor

ēfre = ǣfre

efsian = efesian

±efstan _to hasten, hurry, make haste_, Æ. [ofost]

efstung f. _hastening_.

eft adv. _again, anew, a second time_, _Æ, VPs_; CP: _then, thereupon,
afterwards, hereafter, thereafter_, _Chr_; Æ: _back_, #Chr#: _likewise,
moreover_, _Mt_. [‘_eft_’]

eftācenned _born again_, N.

eftācenn(edn)es f. _regeneration_, N.

eftǣrist (ē) _resurrection_, NG.

eftārīsan^1 _to rise again_, #VPs#.

eftbētung f. _making whole_, NG.

eftboren _born again_, JnLR 3^5.

eftbōt f. _restoration to health_, NG.

eftcerran = eftcyrran

eftcneoreso _regeneration_, DR.

eftcuman^4 _to come back_.

eftcyme † m. _return_.

eftcymeð pres. 3 sg. of eftcuman.

eftcynnes (= cen-) f. _regeneration_, NG.

eftcyrran _to turn back, return_, Æ.

eftedwītan^6 _to reprove_, MtL 21^42.

efter == æfter

eftern? _evening_, LkL 24^29.

eftflōwan^7 _to flow back_, #HGl# 418; 462.

eftflōwung f. _redundance_, #HGl# 418^45.

eftforgifnes f. ‘_remissio_,’ ‘_reconciliatio_,’ NG, DR.

+eftgadrian _to repeat_, GD 277^1.

eftgeafung f. _remuneration_, DR 59^1.

eftgecīgan _to recall_, BH 250^21.

eftgecyrran = eftcyrran

eftgemyndgian _to remember_, DR.

eftgemyndig _remembering_, NG, DR.

eftgian _to repeat_, CP 421^10,11: (+) _restore, strengthen_.

efthweorfan^3 _to turn back, return_. efthweorfende, -hwyrfende
_recurring_, Æ.

eftlēan n. _recompense_, #Cr# 1100.

eftlēaniend m. _rewarder_, DR 89^15.

eftlīsing (ē) f. _redemption_, NG.

eftlōcung f. _‘respectus,’ regard_, DR 86^15.

eftmyndig _remembering_, NG.

eftnīwung f. _restoration_, DR.

eftonfōnd? _receiver_, NG.

eft-reccan pres. 3 sg. -rehð ‘_subdere_,’ OEG 5167.

eftryne m. _‘occursus,’ return_, #VPs# 18^7.

eftscēogian _to put one’s shoes on again_, CM 687.

eft-selenes, -selnes, -tōselenes f. _requital_, NG, DR.

eftsittan^5 ‘_residere_,’ #ÆGr# 157^5.

eftsīð † m. _journey back, return_.

eftsīðgende _turning back, retreating_, WW 491^19.

eftsōna _a second time_, _Mk_: _soon after, again, likewise_, _Mt_.
[‘_eftsoon_’]

eftspellung f. _recapitulation_, WW 491^24.

eftðercian? (-ðræcan) ‘_recalcitrare_,’ _LkL_. (v. ‘_thrash_’).

eftðingung f. _reconciliation_, DR 88^5.

eftwyrd f. _judgment day, resurrection day_? (or ? adj. _future_, GK),
#Ex# 539.

eftyrn = eftryne

efulsung = yfelsung

ēg = īeg

ēg- = ǣg-, ēag-, īeg-

eg v. eg-lā-eg.

-ēgan v. on-ē.

egcgung (WW 104^12) = ecgung

ege (æ) m. _‘awe,’ fear, terror, dread_, _Ps, MtL_; Æ, AO, CP:
_overawing influence_, _Æ_: _cause of fear_, _VPs_.

egean (WW 459^15) = ecgan

egeful _‘awful,’ inspiring or feeling awe_, _Æ, Bo_.

egelāf? f. _survivors of a battle_, #Ex# 370 (or ? ēgorlāf, GK).

egelēas _fearless_, _CP_. [‘_aweless_’] adv. -līce, CP.

egelēasnes f. _boldness_, #Bl# 85^31.

egelic _terrible_, #SPs# 75^7.

egenu f. _chaff, husk_, WW 412^3.

egesa m. _awe, fear, horror, peril_: _monstrous thing, monster_:
_horrible deed_, W 281^4. [ege]

egesful = egeful

egesfullic _terrible_. adv. -līce.

egesfulnes f. _fearfulness, fear_, #JPs#, LL.

egesgrīma m. _terror-mask, ghost_.

±egesian^1 _to frighten, terrify_, AO, CP: _threaten_, OEG 2481.

egesig (eisig) _terrible_, #Sat# 36.

egeslic _awful, dreadful, terrible, threatening_, CP. adv. -līce.

egesung f. _threatening, terror_.

egeswīn n. _a kind of fish_, v. NC 284.

egeðe = egðe

egeðgetīgu npl. _harrowing implements_, LL 455[17].

egewylm m. _terrible wave_, #PPs# 106^24.

+eggian _to egg on, incite_, MkL 15^11.

ēghw- = ǣghw-

egide I. = ecgede pret. 3 sg. of ecgan. II. = egðe

egile = egle

egis- = eges-

egiðe = egðe

egl fn? _mote, beard, awn, ear (of barley)_: _claw, talon_. [_Ger._
achel]

eg-lā-eg ‘_euge!_’ #BRPs# 69^4.

±eglan tr. (_Jud, Lcd_) and impers. (_LL_) _to trouble, plague, molest,
afflict_, Æ, CP. [‘_ail_’]

egle I. _hideous, loathsome, troublesome, grievous, painful_, Æ. II. =
egl

eglian = eglan

ēgnan v. on-ē.  [[under “onēgan”]]

ēgnes f. _fear_, #EPs# 88^41.

egnwirht ‘_merx_,’ #EPs# 126^3 (= gēnwyrht? BT; āgenwyrht? ES 38·1).

ēgo (NG) = ēage

ēgor n? _flood, high tide_, WW 386^29; 474^4.

ēgorhere † m. _flood, deluge_.

ēgorstrēam † m. _sea, ocean_.

egs- = eges-

ēgs- = ēges-, īegs-

egðe f. _harrow, rake_, #Gl#.

egðere m. _harrower_.

Egyptisc _Egyptian_.

eh == eoh

ēh- = ēag-, īeg-, īg-

eher (NG) = ēar

ehhēoloðe = hēahhēoloðe  [[headword spelled “hēahhēolode”]]

ehsl = eaxl

eht == æht, eaht

ehta == eahta

±ēhtan _to attack, persecute, pursue, harass_, Æ, AO, CP: _consider,
judge, observe_. [ōht]

ehtefeald = eahtafeald

ēhtend m. _persecutor_, AO.

ēhtere m. _persecutor_, Æ, CP.

ēhtian = ēhtan

ēhtnes f. _persecution_, Æ, AO, CP.

ēhtre = ēhtere

ēhtung f. _persecution_, AO 274^10.

ehtuwe (#Rd# 37^4) = eahta

ēig == īeg

eige = ege

eis- = eges-

el m. _the letter =l=_.

el-, ele- (prefix) _foreign, strange_.

ēl = (1) īl, (2) ǣl

elan = eglan

elboga (Æ) = elnboga

ēlc (NG) = ǣlc

elch = eolh

elcian _to put off, delay_, Æ.

elciend m. _procrastinator_, Æ 12^166.

elcor adv. _else, elsewhere, otherwise, except, besides_, _BH_.
[‘_elchur_’]

elcora, elcra, elcran adv. _else, otherwise_.

elcung (A) f. _delay_, Æ.

elcur = elcor

eld == ield

eldor == ealdor

ele m. _oil_, _Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP. [‘_ele_’; _L._]

ele- = el-

elebacen _cooked in oil_.

elebēam m. _olive-tree_, Æ: _elder_? _privet_? EC 379´.

elebēamen _of the olive-tree_, WW 128^7.

elebēamstybb m. _stump of an elder_, EC 190^27.

elebearu m. _olive grove_, NG.

eleberge f. _olive_.

eleboga (_WW_) = elnboga

elebytt f. _oil-vessel, chrismatory_, WW 432^25.

electre = elehtre

eledrosna pl. _dregs of oil_, #Lcd# 1·310´.

elefæt n. _oil-vessel, ampulla_, _WW_. [‘_elvat_’]

elegrēofa m. _oil-vessel_? OEG (v. BT).

elehorn m. _oil-flask_, WW 434^7.

elehtre f. _lupine_. [_L._ electrum]

elelēaf n. _olive-leaf_? #Lcd# 102b.

elelēast f. _lack of oil_, GD 44^21.

elelendisc _strange, foreign_. as sb. _stranger, exile_.

elene = eolone

elesdrosna = eledrosna

elesealf f. _oil-salve, nard_, #HGl# 405.

eleseocche f. _oil-strainer_, WW 154^12.

elestybb m. _elder-stump_. [= ellen-]

eletredde f. _oil press_, GD.

eletrēow n. _olive_.

eletrēowen _of olive trees_.

eletwig n. _oleaster_, WW 460^28.

ēleð m. _allodium, freehold_, #Gu# 38. [= ēðel]

elewana m. _lack of oil_, GD 44^9.

elfen f. _nymph, spirit_, WW 352^10. [= ielfen]

elfetu = ilfetu

elfremed == ælfremed

elh = eolh

elhygd f. _distraction, ecstasy_.

ell = el

ell- = el-

ellærn (_Cp_), ellarn = ellen II. and III.

elland † n. _foreign country_. [‘_eilland_’]

elle = ealle  [[under “ealles”]]

ellefne (_An_) = endleofan

ellen I. nm. (always n. in †) _zeal, strength, courage_, _B, Bo, Gu_.
on e. _boldly_. [‘_elne_’] II. n. _‘elder’-tree_, _Lcd_; Mdf. III. adj.
_of elder-wood_, #Lcd#.

ellenahse f. _elder ash_, #Lcd# 121b. [= asce]

ellencræft m. _might, power_, #PPs# 98^5.

ellendǣd † f. _heroic deed_.

ellende I. adj. _foreign, strange, exiled_. II. n. _foreign parts_.

ellenga = eallunga

ellengǣst m. _powerful demon_, B 86.

ellengrāfa m. _elder-grove_, BC 2·469^27.

ellenheard † _mighty, brave, bold_.

ellenhete m. _jealousy_, A 11·98^26.

ellenlǣca m. _champion, combatant_, WW.

ellenlēaf n. _elder-leaf_, #Lcd# 122a.

ellenlēas _wanting in courage_, _Jul_. [‘_ellenlaes_’]

ellenlic _brave_, Æ. adv. -līce.

ellenmǣrðu † f. _fame of courage_.

ellenrind f. _elder bark_, #Lcd#.

ellenrōf _courageous, powerful_, Æ.

ellensēoc _mortally wounded_, B 2787.

ellensprǣc f. _strong speech_, #Gu# 1128.

ellen-stubb, -stybb m. _elder stump_, Ct.

ellentān m. _elder twig_, #Lcd# 116b.

ellentrēow n. _elder-tree_, Ct.

ellenðrīste _heroically bold_, #Jud# 133.

ellenweorc † n. _heroic deed_.

ellenwōd I. f. _zeal_, #PPs# 68^9. II. _furious_, #Jul# 140: _zealous,
earnest_, OEG 364.

ellenwōdian † _to emulate_.

ellenwōdnes † f. _zeal_.

ellenwyrt f. _elderwort, dwarf-elder_.

ellenwyrttruma m. _root of elder_, #Lcd# 101a.

elleoht n. _elision of the letter =l=_, OEG 5471.

ellern = ellen II.

elles adv. _in another manner, otherwise_, _Mt_; Æ, CP: _‘else,’
besides_, _Bl, Seaf_; Æ, CP: _elsewhere_, OEG 2^252. e. hwǣr, hwergen,
hwider _elsewhere_. e. hwæt _anything else, otherwise_.

ellnung = elnung

ellor † _elsewhere, elsewhither, to some other place_. e. londes _in
another land_.

ellorfūs † _ready to depart_.

ellor-gǣst †, -gāst m. _alien spirit_.

ellorsīð m. _death_, B 2451.

ellreord, ellreordig = elreord

ellðēod == elðēod

elm m. _‘elm,’ elm-tree_, _Lcd_. [_L._ ulmus]

elm- = ælm-

elmboga = elnboga

elmrind f. _elm-bark_, #Lcd#.

eln f. _fore-arm, ‘ell’_ (a foot and a half to two feet), _Mt, WW_; Æ,
AO, CP.

elnboga m. ‘_elbow_,’ _WW_ (ele-); CP.

elne, elnes ds. and gs. of ellen.

elngemet n. _ell-measure_, #Gen# 1309.

±elnian _to emulate, be zealous_: _strengthen, comfort oneself_: _gain
strength_, #Lcd#.

elnung f. _comfort, consolation_, ÆL 23^525: _emulation, zeal_, Æ.

elone = eolone

elotr, eloðr (#Gl#) = elehtre

elpan- (#VPs#), elpen- = elpend-

elpend (y^1) m. _elephant_, AO.

elpendbǣnen (elpan-, ylpen-) _of ivory_.

elpendbān n. _ivory_.

elpendtōð m. _ivory_, WW 397^27.

elpent = elpend

elra comp. adj. _other_, B 753. [*el; _Goth._ aljis]

el-reord, -reordig _of strange speech, barbarous_.

elreordignes f. _barbarism_, #Gl#.

-els masc. suffix for inanimate things, as in rēcels, wǣfels.

eltst (Æ) = ieldest superl. of eald.

elðēod f. _strange people, foreign nation_, (in pl.) _foreigners,
enemies_: (pl.) _all people, all nations_, #Cr# 1084, 1337: _exile_, AO.

elðēod-gian, -ian _to live abroad, wander as a pilgrim_: (+) _make
strange, disturb_, #Sc# 106^19.

elðēodgung = elðēodung

elðēodig _foreign, strange, barbarous, hostile_, _Bo, Met_ (æl-); AO,
CP: _exiled_. wk. form mp. el-ðēodian, -ðēodigan _strangers, foreigners,
pilgrims, proselytes_. [‘_altheodi_’]

elðēodige (īo) _abroad_, LkR 15^13.

elðēodiglic (æl-) _foreign, strange, born abroad_. adv. -līce.

elðēodignes f. _foreign travel or residence, pilgrimage, exile_, AO.

elðēodisc _foreign, strange_, Mt 27^7.

elðēodung f. _residence or travel abroad_, BH 332^18.

elðīd-, elðīed-, elðēod- = elðēod-

eluhtre = elehtre

elwiht = ælwiht

em m? _the letter =m=_.

em- = efen-, emn-, ym-, ymb-, ymbe-

ēm- = ǣm-

emb == ymb

embe == ymbe

embeht (NG) == ambiht

embehtian = ambihtan

embiht == ambiht

embren (æ^1, i^2) n. _bucket, pail_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ eimer]

emdenes, emdemes = endemes

emel = ymel

emer = omer

emleoht n. _elision of =m= before vowels in scanning verse_, OEG 5473.

emn == efen

emne == efne, efn-

emnet n. _plain_, AO 186^22. [efen]

emtwā (on) _into two equal parts, in half_, Æ.

-en suffix I. _diminutive_ (neut.) as in mægden (from mægð). II. _to
form feminines_ (a) _with mutation_ (gyden, _from_ god). (b) _without
mutation_ (ðēowen _from_ ðēow). III. _adjectival, with mutation,
denoting material_.

ēn- = ān-

end conj. = and

+endadung f. _finishing_.

ende m. _‘end,’ conclusion_, _Mt_: _boundary, border, limit_, _Ps_; Æ,
AO, CP: _quarter, direction_: _part, portion, division_, AO: _district,
region_, AO: _species, kind, class_: _death_. æt (ðǣm) e. _finally_.

ende-berd-, -bird-, -bred- = endebyrd-

endebyrd f. _order_, #Met# 13^4.

±endebyrdan _to put in order, arrange, ordain, dispose_, Æ.

endebyrdend m. _one who orders or arranges_, OEG.

endebyrdes † _in an orderly manner, regularly, properly_.

endebyrdian = endebyrdan

endebyrdlic _ordinal_, #ÆGr# 282^14. adv. (±) -līce _in an orderly
manner, in order, in succession_, Æ, CP.

endebyrdnes f. _order, succession, series, arrangement, method, rule_,
Æ, CP: _grade, degree, rank, condition_, Æ, CP.

endedæg † m. _last day, day of death_.

endedōgor † mn. _last day, death-day_.

endefæstend m. _finisher_, DR 27^15.

endefurh f. _end-furrow_, Ct.

endelāf f. _last remnant, last_, B 2813.

endelēan † n. _final retribution_.

endelēas, -lēaslic (Æ) _‘endless,’ boundless, eternal_, _Bo_. adv.
-līce, Æ.

endelēasnes f. _endlessness, infinity, eternity_, #ÆGr# 116^10.

endelīf n. _life’s end, death_, #El# 585.

endemann m. _man of the world’s (supposed) final age_, Æ.

endemes (Æ, CP), endemest adv. _equally, likewise, at the same time,
together, unanimously_: _fully, entirely_: _in procession_.

endemest (ænde-) _last_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

endemestnes f. _extremity_ (v. MF 157).

ende-nēhst, -nēxt (ī, ȳ) _extreme, final, last_, Æ.

enderīm m. _number_, #Sat# 12.

endesǣta m. _border-watchman_, B 241.

endespǣc f. _epilogue_, CM 1166.

endestæf † m. _end, conclusion_.

endetīma m. _end of life, last hour_.

endeðrǣst (ænde-) f. _end, destruction_, GD 337^9.

±endian _to ‘end,’ finish_, Æ: _abolish, destroy_, _JnR, Ps_; AO, CP:
_to come to an end, die_, _Gu_; AO.

endleofan (e^2, i^2, u^2, y^2; o^3) num. ‘_eleven_,’ _Æ, BH_.

endlifangilde _entitled to eleven-fold compensation_, LL 3[1]; 470[7].

end-lyfta, -leofta, -leofeða ‘_eleventh_,’ _Bl, Mt_.

endlyfte _in the eleventh place, eleventhly_, LL 182[11].

+endodlic _finite_, #Bo# 44^21.

±endung f. _‘ending,’ end_, _Mt_; CP: (+) _death_.

endwerc n. _pain in the buttocks_, #Lcd# 174a. [wærc]

ened (æ^1, i^2) mf. _drake, duck_, _Gl_. [‘_ende_’]

enelēac = ynnelēac

ēnetere = ānwintre

ēnga = ānga

enge I. (a, æ) _narrow, close, straitened, constrained_: _vexed,
troubled, anxious_: _oppressive, severe, painful, cruel_. II. (a, o)
adv. _sadly, anxiously_.

+enged _troubled, anxious_, WW 357^7.

engel (æ) m. _‘angel,’ messenger_, _Mt_; Æ, CP. [_L._ angelus]

Engel = Angel

engelcund _angelic_, #Gu# 72.

engelcynn † n. _race or order of angels_.

engellic _angelic, of angels_, Æ.

engetrēow = hengetrēow

Englaland n. _country of the Angles, ‘England,’_ _BH_.

Englan, Engle mp. _the Angles_ (as opposed to the Saxons): _the English
generally_. [Angel]

englelic = engellic

Englisc ‘_English_,’ _Æ, LL_; CP. on E. _in (the) English (language)_,
_ÆGr, BH, Mt_.

Engliscmann m. ‘_Englishman_,’ _LL_.

engu † f. _narrowness, confinement_.

enid = ened

ēnig = ǣnig

ēnitre = ānwintre

enlefan = endlufon  [[under “endleofan”]]

ēnlīpig = ānlīpe

enne-lēac, -lēc = ynnelēac

eno = heonu

ent m. _giant_, Æ, AO.

entcynn n. _race of giants_.

entisc _of a giant_, B 2979.

entse = yndse

ēnwintre = ānwintre

eobor = eofor

eobot = eofot

ēoc = gēoc

ēode I. pret. 3 sg. of gān. II. = ēowde

eodor † m. _hedge, boundary_: _limit, region, zone_: _inclosure, fold,
dwelling, house_: _prince, lord_.

eodor-brecð f., -brice m. _breach of an inclosure, house-breaking_, LL.

eodorcan _to chew, ruminate_, BH 346^2. [= edrocian]

eodorgong (eder-) m. _begging_? (GK) _robbery_? (Liebermann), #Cr# 1676.

eodorwīr m. _wire fence_, #Rd# 18^2.

eodur = eodor

eofel = yfel

eofer == eofor

eofera = eafora

eofermodig = ofermodig  [[headword spelled “ofermōdig”]]

eofet = eofot

eofne = efne

eofole f? _danewort, endive_? #Lcd#.

eofon = heofon

eofor (e^1, ea^1, e^2) m. _boar, wild boar_, _Lcd, Ps_: _boar-image on a
helmet_. [‘_ever_’]

eofora = eafora

eoforcumbol n. _boar-image on a helmet_? _boar-shaped ensign_? #El# 76;
259.

eoforfearn (e^1) n. _a kind of fern, polypody_, _Lcd, WW_.
[‘_everfern_’]

eoforheafodsegn (ea^1) n. _banner with a boar’s head design_? B 2152.

eoforlīc m. _boar-image (on a helmet)_, B 303.

eoforspere (u^2) n. _boar-spear_, OEG 7^56.

eoforsprēot n. _boar-spear_, #Gl#.

eoforswīn n. _boar_, #Lcd# 98b.

eoforðring m. _(boar-throng), the constellation Orion_.

eoforðrote f. _carline thistle_, #Lcd#.

±eofot n. _crime, sin, guilt_.

eofoð = eafoð

eoful- (A) = yfel-

eofur (#VPs#) = eofor

eofut (NG) = eofot

ēogor = ēgor

eogoð = geoguð

eoh † nm., gs. ēos _war-horse, charger_: _name of the rune for =e=_.
[_Goth._ aihwa]

ēoh † [= īw] m. _yew-tree_: _name of the rune for =ēo=_.

eola, eolc == eolh

eoldran = ieldran  [[form of “ieldra”?]]

eolene = eolone

ēoles gs. of eolh.

eolet n. _voyage_? (Cosijn), B 224.

eolh m. [g. ēoles] _elk_.

eolh-sand (-sang, #HGl# 431) n. _amber_, #Gl#.

eolhsecg (eolhx-, eolx-, ilug-) m. _‘papyrus,’ reed, sedge_, #Gl#: _name
of a rune_, #Run# 15.

eolhstede = ealhstede

eolone f. _elecampane_.

eoloð = ealað (v. ealu)

eolxsecg = eolhsecg

eom I. v. wesan. II. = heom, him dp. of hē, hēo, hit

eond == geond

eonde ?= ende (but v. JAW 31)

eonu = heonu

eor- = ear-, ier-

ēor- = ēar-

eorcnanstān, eorc(l)anstān m. _precious stone_. [_Goth._ -airkns]

ēored (o^2) nf. _troop, band, legion, company_. [eoh, rād]

ēoredcist (o^2, ie^3, e^3, y^3) † f. _troop, company_.

ēoredgeatwe fpl. _military apparel_, B 2866.

ēoredgerīd n. _troop of horsemen_, WW 229^1.

ēoredhēap m. _troop, host_, DD 113.

ēoredmæcg m. _horseman_, #Rd# 23^3.

ēoredmann m. _trooper, horseman_, BH, WW.

ēoredmenigu f. _legion_, #Gd#.

ēoredðrēat m. _troop, host_, #Rd# 4^49.

ēored-weorod, -wered n. _band, company_, GD 71^6.

eorl m. _‘earl,’ nobleman_ (origly. a Danish title = the native
‘ealdorman’), _Ct, LL, Ma_: (†) _brave man, warrior, leader, chief_,
_Cr, Gen, Rd_: _man_.

eorlcund _noble_, LL.

eorldōm m. _earldom, rank of an earl_, #Chr#.

eorlgebyrd † f. _noble birth_.

eorlgestrēon † n. _treasure, wealth_.

eorlgewǣde n. _armour_, B 1442.

eorlic (1) = ierlic; (2) eorllic

eorlisc _of noble rank_, LL 173.

eorllic _chivalrous, manly_.

eorlmægen † n. _band of noble warriors_.

eorlriht n. _earl’s right_, LL 458[5].

eorlscipe † m. _manliness, courage_.

eorlweorod n. _host of noble warriors_, B 2893.

eormencynn (y^1) † n. _mankind_.

eormengrund n. _wide world_, B 859.

eormenlāf f. _huge legacy_, B 2234.

eormenstrȳnd f. _race, generation_, #Sol# 329.

eormenðēod (y^1) f. _mighty people_, #Men# 139.

eorn- = georn-

eornes f. _anger_, #Bl# 123^8; HL.

eornest == eornost

eornost f. _earnestness, zeal_, Æ, CP. on eornost(e) _in earnest,
earnestly, truly_: _seriousness_, W: _battle_. [‘_earnest_’]

eornoste (e^2) I. _‘earnest,’ zealous, serious_, _Æ_. II. adv.
_earnestly, seriously, courageously_: _fiercely_.

eornostlīce I. adv. _‘earnestly,’ strictly, truly, in truth, indeed_,
_Mt, LL_. II. conj. _therefore, but_.

eornust == eornost

ēorod == ēored

eorð = eorðe, heorð

eorð-æppel m. nap. -æppla _‘earth-apple,’ cucumber_, _Æ_:
‘_mandragora_,’ _WW_.

eorðærn (e^2) n. _earth-house, grave_.

eorðbeofung (i^2) f. _earthquake_, AO.

eorðberge f. _strawberry_, WW 242^6. [berie; _Ger._ erdbeere]

eorðbīgenga m. _earth-dweller_, BH 268^31.

eorðbīgennes f. _agriculture_, WW 144^21.

eorðbrycg f. _bridge of poles covered with earth_, BC 3·223^21.

eorð-būend †, -būg(ig)end m. _earth-dweller, man_, Æ.

eorðburh = eorðbyrig

eorðbyfung = eorðbeofung

eorðbyrgen f. _grave_, NC 284.

eorðbyrig f. _earthwork, mound, embankment, road_.

eorðcafer m. _cockchafer_, WW 122^16. [ceafor]

eorð-cenned, -cend _earth-born_, #Ps#.

eorðcræft m. _geometry_, OEG 3119.

eorð-crypel, -cryppel m. _paralytic, palsied man_, NG.

eorðcund, eorðcundlic (CP) _sprung from the earth, earthly_.

eorðcyning m. _earthly king, king of the country_.

eorðcynn n. _human race_, #Ex# 370.

eorðdenu f. _valley_, NC 284.

eorðdraca ‡ m. _dragon that lives in the earth_.

eorðdyne m. _earthquake_, _Chr_ 1060. [‘_earth-din_’]

eorðe f. _ground, soil_, _Æ, B, LkL_; AO, CP: _‘earth,’ mould_, _Gu_:
world, _Æ, B, Mt_: _country, land, district_, _Jn_.

eorðen adj. _of or in the earth_, OEG 3312?

eorðern = eorðærn

eorðfæst _‘earthfast,’ firm in the earth_, _Æ_.

eorðfæt n. _earthly vessel, body_, #Soul# 8.

eorð-gealla, -galla m. _earth-gall, lesser centaury_.

eorðge-byrst, -berst n. _landslip_, Ct.

eorðgemǣre n. _boundary of the earth_, #PPs# 21^25.

eorðgemet n. _geometry_, #Gl#.

eorðgesceaft f. _earthly creature_, #Met# 20^194.

eorðgræf n. _hole in the earth_, #Rd# 59^9.

eorðgrāp f. _earth’s embrace_, #Ruin# 6.

eorðhele m. _a covering of the ground_.

eorðhrērnes f. _earthquake_, #Bl#, NG.

eorðhūs n. _cave-dwelling, den_.

eorðifig (y^2) n. _ground ivy_, #Lcd# 1·212.

eorðlic _‘earthly,’ worldly_, _Bl, Mt_; Æ. adv. -līce.

eorðling = yrðling

eorðmægen n. _earthly power_, #Rim# 69.

eorð-mata [-maða?] m. _‘vermis,’ worm_, #Gl#.

eorðmistel m. _basil (plant)_, #Lcd# 33a.

eorðnafela m. _asparagus_, #Lcd#.

eorðnutu f. _‘earth-nut,’ pig-nut_, _Ct_. [hnutu]

eorðreced n. _cave-dwelling_, B 2719.

eorðrest f. _bed laid on the ground_, WW 362^11.

eorðrīce † n. _earthly kingdom, earth_.

eorðrima m. _a plant_, #Lcd# 120a.

eorðscræf n. ds. -scrafe _cave-dwelling, cavern_, CP: _sepulchre_.

eorðsele † m. _cave-dwelling_.

eorðslihtes _close to the ground_, Æ.

eorðstede m. _earth_, #PPs# 73^7.

eorðstirung = eorðstyrung  [[under “eorðstyren”]]

eorð-styren (GD), -styrennes (NG), -styrung (Æ) f. _earthquake_.

eorðtilia m. _‘earth-tiller,’ husbandman, farmer_, W 305^31.

eorðtilð f. _‘earth-tilth,’ agriculture_, _WW_.

eorðtūdor n. _human race_, #PPs# 117^22.

eorðtyrewe f. _earth-tar, bitumen_, AO 74^17.

eorðu (N) = eorðe

eorðwæstm f. _fruit of the earth_.

eorð-waran (CP), -ware mpl., -waru fpl. _earth-dwellers_, _AO_.
[‘_earthware_’]

eorðweall m. _earth-wall, mound_.

eorðweard m. _region of earth_, B 2334.

eorðweg † m. _earth_.

eorðwela m. _wealth_: _fertility_, AO.

eorðweorc n. _work on the land_.

eorðwerod n. _inhabitants of earth_, W 25^21; 203^5.

eorðwestm = eorðwæstm

eorðyfig = eorðifig

ēorwicga = ēarwicga

ēos gs. of eoh.

eosel, eosol = esol

eosele f. _she-ass_, #Bl#.

ēost- = ēast-

eosul = esol

eotan (#VPs#) = etan

Eotas = Eotenas

eoten † m. _giant, monster, enemy_. [_ON._ iotonn]

Eotenas mpl. _Jutes_.

eotend (= etend) _voracious, gluttonous_, WW 396^8; 523^6.

eotenisc _gigantic_, _B_. [‘_etenish_’]

Eotolware mp. _Italians_, BH 108^11.

ēoton = ǣton pret. pl. of etan.

eotonisc = eotenisc

eotonweard f. _watch against monsters_? B 668.

ēoðe (N) = ēaðe

ēow I. dat. of gē pers. pron. _to you, you_. II. interj. _wo! alas!_
III. = gīw. IV. = īw. V. m. _sheep_.

ēowā = ēow II.

ēowan = īewan

ēowberge = īwberge

ēowcig = ēowocig

ēowd f. _sheepfold_, Æ: _flock, herd_, Æ.

ēowde n. _flock (of sheep)_, _herd_, Æ.

ēowdescēap n. _sheep of the flock_, #PPs# 64^14.

ēowe I. gs. of ēowu. II. = ēwe

ēowed = ēowd

ēowede = ēowde

ēowende (dat.) ‘_testiculis_,’ LL 64[25,1].

ēower I. gp. of gē pers. pron. (2nd pers.). II. possess. pron. _your,
yours_.

ēowerlendisc _of your land, ‘vestras,’_ #ÆGr# 94^1.

ēowestre m. _sheepfold_.

ēowian = īewan

ēowic acc. pl. of ðū (v. gē).  [[under “ðu”]]

ēowistre = ēowestre

ēowocig _of a ewe, ewe’s_, #Lcd# 16a.

ēowod = ēowd

ēowode = ēowde

ēowohumele f. _female hop-plant_, #Lcd#.

ēowomeoluc f. _ewe’s milk_, #Lcd# 70a.

ēowu f. ‘_ewe_,’ _Æ, LL_.

ēowunga = ēawunga

epistol m. _letter_.

epl, eppel = æppel

eppan = yppan

ēr = (1) ǣr, (2) ȳr, (3) ēar I.

er- = ær-, ear-, ier-, yr-

ēr- = ǣr-, ēar-

erce == arce

ercnastān (NG) = eorcnanstān

eretic _heretical_. [_L._]

erian, erigean _to plough_, _Æ, Bo, Lk_; CP. [‘_ear_’]

erinaces pl. _hedgehogs_, #PPs# 103^17.

eringland n. _arable land_, Ct.

eriung f. _ploughing_, WW 104^6.

ernð (æ) f. _crop of corn_, BH 44^23#c#.

ersc m? _stubble-field_, EC 282´; 290´.

erschen f. _quail_, Æ, WW.

ēsa v. ōs.

ēsceap = ǣsceap

esl = eaxl

esne m. _labourer, slave, servant, retainer_: _youth, man_, CP. [_Goth._
asneis]

esnecund _of a labourer_, WW 212^44.

esnemon (æ^1) m. _hireling_, JnR 10^13.

esnewyrhta m. _mercenary, hireling_.

esnlīce _like a man, manfully_, Æ, CP.

esol mf. _ass_, CP. [_L._ asellus]

ess m. _name of the letter =s=_.

essian _to waste away_, #RPs# 118^139.

ēst mf. _favour, grace, bounty, kindness, love_, _An, B_: _harmony,
consent_: (in pl.) _delicacies_, _WW_; Æ. [‘_eate_’]

ēstan (w. d.) _to live luxuriously_, W 190^17.

ēstan = ēastan

ēste _gracious, liberal_, _B, Gen_. [‘_este_’]

ēstelic _kind, gracious_, #EPs# 68^17: _delicate, dainty (of food)_, MF
(Vesp. D xiv). adv. -līce, CP.

ēstful _gracious, devoted, devout_, Æ: _fond of luxuries_, _WW_
218^18,19. [‘_estfull_’] adv. -līce.

ēstfulnes f. _devotion, zeal_, CP: _luxury, lechery_.

ēstgeorn _delicate, fond of luxuries_, WW 218^18.

ēstig _gracious, liberal_, #Pa# 16.

ēstines f. _benignity_, #EPs# 64^12.

ēstlic == ēstelic

ēstmete m. _dainty, delicacy, luxury_, Æ.

-estre = f. agent, as in wītegestre, _prophetess_.

ēstum _freely, willingly, gladly_.

esul = esol

esulcweorn f. _mill-stone turned by an ass_, CP 31^17.

ēswic == ǣswic

et I. = æt prep. II. pres. 3 sg. of etan.

et- = æt-, ed-

ēt (NG) == æt

±etan^5 (ea, eo) _to ‘eat,’_ _Æ, AO, Jn_: _devour, consume_, _Jn_; CP:
(reflex.) _provision oneself_: (+) _eat together_.

etelond n. _pasture land_, KC 2·95^14.

etemest = ytemest  [[headword spelled “ȳtemest”]]

eten = eoten

etend m. _eater, glutton_.

etenlǣs f. _pasture_, LL 452[20].

etol (ettul) _voracious_.

etonisc (_B_) = eotenisc

etsomne = ætsamne

etst = itst pres. 2 sg. of etan.

ettan _to graze, pasture land_, AO 18^25.

ettulnes f. _greediness, gluttony_, #Sc# 55^6.

ēð I. comp. adv. _more easily_. II. = ȳð

eð- = æð-, ed-

ēð- = ǣð-, ēað-, īð-, ȳð-

eðcwide (#Gl#) = edcwide

ēðe † _barren, waste, desolate_. [_Ger._ öde]

ēðel (oe, N) mn. gs. ēðles _country, native land, home_, _Lk, Met_; CP.
†hwǣles ē. _the sea_, #Chr# 975#a#: _name of the rune for =œ=_.
[‘_ethel_’]

ēðelboda m. _land’s apostle, native preacher_, #Gu# 976.

ēðelcyning m. _king of the land_, #Cr# 997.

ēðeldrēam m. _domestic joy_, #Gen# 1607.

ēðeleard † m. _native dwelling_.

ēðelfæsten † n. _fortress_.

ēðelland † n. _fatherland, country_.

ēðellēas † _homeless, exiled_.

ēðelmearc † f. _boundary of one’s country, territory_.

ēðelrīce † n. _native country_.

ēðelriht † n. _hereditary right_.

ēðel-seld †, -setl † n. _settlement_.

ēðelstæf (ul, yl) m. _heir, successor_.

ēðelstaðol † m. _settlement_.

ēðelstōl † m. _hereditary seat, habitation_: _royal city, chief city_.

ēðelstōw † f. _dwelling-place_.

ēðelturf † f. (ds. -tyrf) _fatherland_.

ēðelðrymm ‡ m. _glory of one’s own land_.

ēðelweard † m. _lord of the realm, man_.

ēðelwynn † f. _joy of ownership_.

ēðgung f. _breath, breathing, inspiration_: _hard breathing_, RB 68^3.

±ēðian _to breathe_, _GD_: _smell_. [‘_ethe_’]

ēðr (N) = ǣdr, ǣdre  [[under “æddre”]]

eðða (MtR) = oððe

ēðung I. f. _laying waste, destroying_, #Gl#. [ēðe, īðan] II. = ēðgung

eðwilte _easily turned_, OEG 1151.

ēuwā interj. _woe!_ #Gl#.

ēw- = ǣw-, ēaw-, ēow-

ēwe = ēowu

ex, exe f. _brain_, #Lcd# (v. A 30·129).

ex == eax

exen v. oxa.

exlistealla ?= eaxlgestealla

exorcista m. _exorcist_, ÆL 31^141.




=F=


fā v. fāh I.

faca gp. of fæc.

fācen n. nap. fācnu _deceit, fraud, treachery, sin, evil, wickedness,
crime_, _Mt, LL_; Æ, AO: _blemish, fault (in an object)_, LL 114[56];
398[9]. [‘_faken_’]

fācendǣd f. _sin, crime_, #PPs# 118^53.

fācen-ful, -fullic _deceitful, crafty_.

fācengecwis f. _conspiracy_, WW.

fācengeswipere n. _deceit_, #PPs# 82^3.

fācenlēas _guileless_: _pure_, NG.

fācenlic _deceitful_, RB 95^12,15. adv. -līce, Æ. [‘_faken_’]

fācensearu † n. _treachery_.

fācenstafas mp. _treachery, deceit_, B 1018.

fācentācen n. _deceitful token_, #Cr# 1566.

facg m. _plaice_? _loach_? WW 180^32.

fācian _to try to obtain, get_, AO 152^7.

fācn == fācen

fācne = fǣcne

facum dp. of fæc.

±fadian _to arrange, dispose, guide_, Æ.

fadiend m. _manager_, OEG 56^308.

±fadung f. _arrangement, order, disposition, dispensation, rule,
dominion_, Æ.

fadur (A) = fæder

fæc (e) n. _space of time, while, division, interval_, _Lk_; Æ, CP:
_period of five years, lustrum_, WW 431^16. [‘_fec_’; _Ger._ fach]

fæccan = feccan

fæcele (e^1) f. _torch_, WW. [_Ger._ fackel]

fǣcenlīce = fācenlīce

fæcful _spacious_, #Sc# 185^5.

fæcile (#Gl#) = fæcele

fǣcne I. _deceitful, treacherous_, _Ps_: _vile, worthless_. II. adv.
_deceitfully, maliciously, disgracefully_: (†) _exceedingly_.
[‘_faken_’]

fǣcnig ‘_dolosus_?’ #RPs# 72^18 (or ? fǣcnigung ‘_dolus_,’ ES 38·13).

+fæd _orderly, well-conducted_, LL: _calm, composed_, W 51^24. [fadian]

fǣd- = fēd-

fæder (e^1) m. usu. indecl. in sg. ‘_father_,’ _Æ, VPs_; AO, CP: _male
ancestor_, _LkL, Mt_: _the Father, God_, _Jn, Mt, VPs_: (in pl.)
_parents_, Æ. eald f. _grandfather_. ðridda, fēowerða f. etc.
_great-grandfather, great-great-grandfather_, _etc._

fædera (e^1) m. _paternal uncle_, AO. [cp. _Ger._ vetter]

+fædera m. _godfather (in his relation to the father)_, Æ. [_Ger._
gevatter]

fæderæðelo † npl. _patrimony_: _paternal kinship_.

fæderen _paternal_.

+fæderen _born of the same father_, AO 114^14.

fæderenbrōðor m. _brother (from the same father)_.

fæderencnōsl (fædren-) n. _father’s kin_, LL 54[9].

fæderencynn n. _father’s kin_.

fæderenhealf f. _father’s side_, #Chr# 887#a#.

fæderenmǣg m. _paternal kinsman_, #Chr# 887#e#.

fæderenmǣgð f. _paternal kindred_, LL 392[3].

fæderēðel m. _fatherland_, AO.

fæderfeoh n. _dowry paid by the father of the bride_, LL.

fædergeard m. _father’s dwelling_, #Gen# 1053.

fædergestrēon n. _patrimony_, #Gl#.

fæderhīwisc n? ‘_paterfamilias_,’ NG.

fæderingmǣg = fæderenmǣg

fæderland n. _paternal land, inheritance_, #Chr# 1101.

fæderlēas _fatherless_, W.

fæderlic _‘fatherly,’ paternal, ancestral_, _El_. adv. -līce.

+fædlic _fit, suitable, proper_. adv. -līce: _orderly, quietly_:
_craftily_, #CPs# 82^4. [fadian]

fædern- = fæderen-

fæderslaga m. _parricide_, WW.

fæderswica m. _traitor to one’s father_, ÆL 19^224.

fædm = fæðm

fædr- = fæder-

+fædrian _to have the same father_, AO.

fǣfne (LkR 1^29) = fǣmne

+fæg _beloved_, B 915. [_OHG._ gifag]

-fǣgan v. ā-f.

fǣge _‘fey,’ doomed (to death)_, _fated, destined_, _An, B, Ma_: _dead_:
_unhappy, accursed_, _Cr_: _feeble, cowardly_, _Gu_. [_Ger._ feige]

±fægen (w. g.) _‘fain,’ glad, joyful, rejoicing_, _B, Bo_; AO.

fægenian = fægnian

fægennes f. _joy_, NC 285.

fæger (ǣ) I. _‘fair,’ lovely, beautiful_, _Bo, Gen_; AO, CP: _pleasant,
agreeable_, _Ex_: _attractive_, _Gen_; Æ. II. f. _beauty_, _Bo_.

fæger- = fægr-

fægerlīce _splendidly_, LkL 16^19.

fægernes f. _‘fairness,’ beauty_, _LPs, Sc_; Æ.

fægerwyrde _smooth-speaking_, FT 12.

fægn = fægen

fægnes f. _diversity_, #LPs# 44^15.

±fægnian (a) (w. g. etc.) _to rejoice, be glad, exult_, _Bo, Met_:
_fawn_, Æ: _applaud_. [‘_fain_’]

±fægnung f. _rejoicing_, #ELSPs#.

+fǣgon pret. pl. of +fēon.

fægre (ǣ) _fairly, elegantly, beautifully_, _Æ_: _pleasantly, softly,
gently, kindly_, _Gen, Men_: _well, justly_: _early_, LkR 24^1 (e).
[‘_fair_’]

±fægrian _to become beautiful_: _adorn, decorate_.

fǣgð? f. _imminent death_, #An# 284 (GK).

fǣhan = fēgan II.

fæht = feoht

fǣhð f. _hostility, enmity, violence, revenge, vendetta_, AO. [fāh; cp.
_Ger._ fehde]

fǣhðbōt f. _payment for engaging in a feud_, LL 266[25]; 286[5,2d].

fǣhðe, fǣhðo, fǣhðu = fǣhð

fæl- = feal-, fel-, fyl-

fǣlǣcan = fālǣcan

fǣle † I. _faithful, trusty, good_, _Ps_: _dear, beloved_. [‘_fele_’]
II. adv. _truly, well, pleasantly_.

±fǣlsian _to expiate, condition, cleanse, purify_: (+) _pass through_.

fǣman _to ‘foam,’_ _MkL_. [fām]

fǣmhādlic = fǣmnhādlic

fǣmig = fāmig

fǣmnanhād = fǣmnhād

fǣmne (ē) f. _maid, virgin, bride_, Æ: (+) _woman_: _virago_.

fǣmne(n)dlic (GD) = fǣmnhādlic

fǣmnhād m. _virginity, maidenhood_, AO.

fǣmnhādesmon m. _virgin_, RB 136^24.

fǣmnhādlic (OEG), fǣmn(en)lic _maidenly, virginal_.

fæn == fen

fær I. n. (? also f.) nap. faru (±) _way, journey, passage, expedition_,
_A, Lk_. mannes f. _highway_, ÆL 25^441: _proceedings, life_, Æ:
_movable possessions, means of subsistence_, HL: _ark, ship_. [‘_fare_’]
II. _aspect_? #Met# 31^4.

fǣr (ē) I. m. _sudden danger, peril_, _B, Ex_: _sudden attack_:
_marvel_? #Bl# 199^24. [‘_fear_’] II. = fēfer. III. = fæger

fær- = far-, fer-, fear-, feor-, fier-, for-

fǣr- prefix = (1) _sudden, fearful_; (2) fēr-

fǣrærning f. _quick marching_, GD 14^24.

fǣran _to frighten_, _Æ_; CP: _raven_, MtL 7^15 (ē). [‘_fear_’]

fǣrbena m. _peasant, small-holder_? (Lieb.), LL 383[50].

fǣrbifongen _beset by dangers_, B 2009.

fǣrblǣd (ē^1) m. _sudden blast (of wind)_, #Jul# 649.

fǣrbryne m. _scorching heat_, #Ex# 72.

fǣrclamm (ē) m. _sudden seizure_, #Ex# 119.

fǣrcoðu f. _apoplexy_, #Lcd#.

fǣrcwealm m. _sudden pestilence_.

fǣrcyle m. _intense cold_, #Gen# 43.

fǣrdēað m. _sudden death_, WW 351^19.

fǣrdryre m. _sudden fall_, #Cra# 48.

fǣredlic (Æ) = fǣrlic

færeht = færriht

færeld (a^1) nm. _way, journey, passage, expedition_, Æ, AO, CP:
_retinue, company_, AO: _course of life, conduct_, Æ: _progress, power
of locomotion_, Æ: _the Passover_.

færeldfrēols m. _passover feast_.

færelt (AO, CP) = færeld

færennes = færnes

færeð pres. 3 sg. of faran.

færfrīg _without passage-money_, #Kl#.

fǣrfyll (on) _headlong_, WW 426^8.

fǣrgripe † m. _sudden grip_.

fǣrgryre † m. _awful horror_.

fǣrhaga m. _hedge of terrors_, #Gu# 933.

fǣringa (ē) _suddenly, unexpectedly, quickly, forthwith, by chance_,
_Lk_; Æ, CP. [‘_feringe_’]

fǣrlic _sudden, unexpected_, _AO, WW_; Æ, CP. adv. -līce, _Lk_.
[‘_ferly_’]

færnes f. _passage, traffic_, BH, MtR.

fǣrnīð m. _hostile attack_, B 476.

fǣrrǣs m. _sudden rush_, LkL 8^33.

fǣrrǣsende (ē^1) ‘_repentia_,’ DR 125^16.

færriht n. _passage-money_, ÆL 23b^352.

færsceatt m. _passage-money, fare_, #Andr#.

fǣrsceaða m. _enemy_, #Ma# 142.

fǣrscyte m. _sudden shot_, #Cr# 766.

fǣrsearo n. _sudden artifice_, #Cr# 770.

fǣrsēað m. _deep pit_, WW 193^6.

fǣrslide m. _sudden fall_, #PPs# 114^8.

fǣrspell † n. _dreadful tidings_.

færst pres. 2 sg. of faran.

fǣrstice m. _sudden stitch (pain)_.

fǣrstylt m? _amazement_, LkL 5^26.

fǣrswīge f. _amazement_, MkL 5^42 (ē).

færð I. = ferð. II. = pres. 3 sg. of faran.

fǣrunga, fǣrunge (Æ) = fǣringa

fǣruntrymnes f. _sudden sickness_, #Lcd# 107b.

fǣrwundor n. _terrible wonder_, #Ex# 279.

fæs (a, ea) n. _fringe, border_, _MtL_. [‘_fas_’]

fǣsceaftnes = fēasceaftnes

fæsl † n? _seed, offspring, progeny_.

fæsnian = fæstnian

fæst I. _‘fast,’ fixed, firm, secure, steadfast, strong_, _BH, Bo, Lcd_:
_stiff, heavy, dense_, _Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP: _made strong, fortified_, _BH_;
Æ: _religious, Christian (book)_. II. (#Gu# 192) = fæsten

±fæstan _to fasten, make firm, ratify, establish_, _MkL, LkL_: _entrust,
commit_: _‘fast’ (‘i-fast’), abstain from food_, _A, Bl, Lcd_; CP:
_atone for (by fasting)_, #Da# 592.

fæste (e) _‘fast,’ firmly, securely_, _BH, Bo_; Æ: _straitly, strictly_:
_heavily (sleep)_.

fæsten n. _fastness, stronghold, fortress_, AO, CP: _cloister_, Æ: (±)
_fast (abstinence from food) Bl, LL, Mt, VPs_; CP: _firmament, sky_.
[‘_fasten_’]

fæstenbehæfednes f. _parsimony_, WW 504^10.

fæstenbryce m. _breach of fast_, LL, W.

fæstendæg m. _fast-day_, RB, W.

fæstendīc m. _fort-ditch, moat_, Ct.

fæstengangol = fæstgangol

fæstengeat n. _castle-gate_, #Jud# 162.

fæstengeweorc n. _liability for repair of the defences of a town_.

fæst-enlic, -ernlic _quadragesimal_, DR.

fæstennes = fæstnes

fæstentīd f. _fast_, LL.

fæstenwuce f. _week of fasting_, ÆL 23b^111.

fǣstermōdor = fōstormōdor

fæstern n. _fast_: _Quadragesima_, LG.

fæstes _by chance_, WW.

fæstgangol (o^2, e^3) _steady, faithful_, #Cra# 80.

fæsthafol _retentive, tenacious_, Æ: _sparing, miserly_, CP.

fæsthafolnes f. _economy_, CP 453^28.

fæstheald _firmly fixed_, ÆL 23^423.

fæsthȳdig † _constant, steadfast_.

±fæstian (ea) _to commend, entrust, commit_, LkL.

fæsting f. _commendation, trust, guardianship_, GD 239^15; LL 58[7].

fæstingan = fæstnian

fæstingmann m. _a kind of retainer_, EC.

fæstlic _firm, fixed, steadfast, resolute_. adv. -līce (+ in AS)
_fixedly, steadily, constantly_, _Bo_: _unceasingly_, _Æ, Bl_: _verily,
but_, NG. [‘_fastly_’]

fæstmōd _constant in mind_, AO 288^17.

fæstnes f. _firmness, massiveness, stability_, _Bo_: _‘fastness,’
stronghold_, Æ: _firmament_, Æ.

fæstnian _to ‘fasten,’ fix, secure, bind_, _An_: _confirm, ratify,
conclude (peace)_, _Ma, OET_: _betroth_.

±fæstnung f. _fastening, bond_: _security, safety_: _protection,
shelter_: _ratification, pledge, engagement_: _exhortation_, MkL p2^5:
_monument_, MtL p5^4; Mk 5^5.

fæstrǣd _firm, constant, steadfast_, _B, Bo_; CP, Æ. [‘_fastrede_’]

fæstrǣdlic _constant, steadfast_, #Bo# 20^21. adv. -līce.

fæstrǣdnes f. _constancy, fortitude_, #Bo#.

fæststeall _standing firmly_.

fæsð = fæst

fæt n. nap. fatu _vat, vessel, jar, cup_, _Æ, B, JnL_; AO, CP: _casket_,
#El# 1026. [‘_fat_’]

fǣt I. † n. _plate, beaten out metal (especially gold)_, _gold
ornament_. II. = fǣtt I.

±fǣtan _to cram, put (in)_, _load_, CP.

fǣted I. † _ornamented with gold_. [cp. _Goth._ fētjan] II. = fǣtt

fǣtedhlēor _with cheek ornaments_, B 1026.

fǣtedsinc n. _beaten gold_, #An# 478.

fǣtels, fǣtel m. _vessel_, _AO, Lcd_; Æ: _pouch, bag, sack_, Æ, CP.
[‘_fetles_’]

fætelsian = fetelsian

fǣtelsian _to put into a vessel_.

fætfyllere (e^2) m. _cupbearer_, GD.

fǣtgold n. _beaten gold_, B 1921.

fǣthengest m. _riding horse_, #Rd# 23^14.

fætian = fetian

fǣtnes f. ‘_fatness_,’ _Ps_; Æ, CP: _the richest part of anything_,
_Ps_.

+fǣtnian = +fǣttian

fǣtt I. (ē) _fat, fatted_, _Æ, AO, Lk_. II. = fǣted

fǣttian (+) _to become fat_, _Ps_: (+) _anoint_, _Ps_: _fatten_.
[‘_fat_’]

+fættig _fat, rich_, #CPs# 19^4.

fǣðe = fēðe

fæðelas ‘_histriones_’? v. OEG 39^2.

fæðer = feðer

fæðm (e) mf. _outstretched or encircling arms, embrace, grasp_, _An,
Rd_: _protection_: _interior, bosom, lap, breast, womb_: _‘fathom,’
cubit_, _Æ, Cp, WW_; Æ: _power_, _B, Cr_: _expanse, surface_.

fæðman, fæðmian _to surround, envelop, clasp, embrace_, _An, B_.
[‘_fathom_’]

fæðmlic _embracing, enclosing_, WW 486^6.

-fæðmnes v. on-f.

fæðmrīm n. _fathom, cubit_, #Ph# 29.

fæx = feax

fæxnes = feaxnes

fæxtælg? m. _pomade_, Cp 379#f#? (v. AB 6·163).

fāg I. _variegated, spotted, dappled, stained, dyed_, _Lcd_: _shining,
gleaming_, _Ps_. [‘_faw_’] II. = fāh I.

fāg- = fāh-

fage f. (WW 94) = facg

fagen = fægen

fagen- = fægn-

fāgettan _to change colour_, #Lcd# 3·240^23. mid wordum f. _speak
evasively_.

fāgetung f. _change_, ÆH 2·538^33.

±fāgian _to change, vary in colour_: _embroider_, RB 137^8.

fāgnes f. _scab, ulcer, eruption_, Æ: _various colours, brilliancy_, HL:
‘_qualitas_,’ ‘_varietas_,’ OEG.

fagnian = fægnian

fāgung f. _variety_, DR, GD.

fāgwyrm m. _basilisk_, #VPs# 90^13.

fāh I. nap. fā _hostile_, _B_: (±) _proscribed, outlawed, guilty,
criminal_, _B_. [_‘foe_’; fēogan] II. (±) m. ‘_foe,’ enemy_, _LL_; Æ,
AO. III. == fāg I.

fahame (= fēa-, fēorh-hama?) _womb_, WW 40^28.

±fāhmann m. ‘_foeman_,’ LL 50[5].

fahnian = fægnian

fala I. (WW 52^11) ?d. of *fealh _tube, pipe_ (ES 38·337). II. = fela

fālǣcan _to be at enmity with, show hostility to_, LL 160[20,7].

fal-d, -æd, -od, -ud m. _‘fold,’ stall, stable, cattle-pen_, _A, Gl,
Jn_.

fald- (N) = feald-

faldgang m. _going to the (sheep-) fold_, W 170^20#e#.

faldhrīðer n. _stalled ox_, MF 158.

faldian _to make a fold, hurdle off sheep_, _LL_ 454[9]. [‘_fold_’]

falew- = feal(e)w-

fall- (#VPs#; NG) = feall-

falod = fald

fals I. adj. _false_, W 272^4. II. n. _falsehood, fraud, counterfeit_.
[late; from _L._]

falðing _mass, load_, WW 33^8.

falu = fealu

falud = fald

fām n. ‘_foam_,’ _BH, Ep_; Æ.

fāmbig = fāmig

fāmblāwende v. līg-f.

fāmgian _to foam, boil_, #Ex# 481.

fāmig (ǣ) ‘_foamy_,’ _Rd_.

fāmigbord _with foaming banks (of a stream)_, #Met# 26^26.

fāmigbōsm _with foamy bosom_, #Ex# 493.

fāmigheals † _foamy-necked_.

fana m. _banner, standard_, _Met_; OEG. [‘_fane_’; _Ger._ fahne]

+fāna gp. of +fā.

fanbyrde _standard-bearing_, v. OEG 1744.

fand pret. 3 sg. of findan.

fandere m. _tempter_, #Sc# 206^4.

±fandian (often w. g., but also d. and a.) _to try, attempt, tempt,
test, examine, explore, search out_, _AO, Gen, Mk, Run_; CP. [‘_fand_,’
‘_fond_’; findan]

fandung f. _investigation, trial, temptation, test, proof_, Æ, CP.

fane I. f. (NG, o^1) = fann. II. = fanu

fang m. _plunder, booty_, #Chr# 1016. [fōn]

fangen pp. of fōn.

+fangian _to join, fasten_, #Bo# 96^14.

fann f. _winnowing, ‘fan,’_ _Cp, Lk, LL_. [_L._ vannus]

fannian _to ‘fan,’_ _Sc_ 1861^17.

fant (o) m. ‘_font_,’ _Æ_: _baptismal water_, HL 15^293.

fantbæð n. _baptismal water, laver of baptism_, Æ.

fantbletsung f. _consecration of water for baptism_, ÆP 188^12.

fantfæt n. _baptismal font_, Æ.

fanthālgung (o) f. _consecration at the font_, W 36^2.

fanthālig _holy from connection with the font_, #Lcd# 140b.

fantwæter n. _‘font-water,’ water used at baptism, laver of baptism_,
_Lcd_ (o); Æ.

fanu f. _standard_: _iris (plant)_.

fāra gp. of fāh I.

+fara m. _travelling companion, comrade_.

±faran^6 _to set forth, go, travel, wander, proceed_, _Bl, Gen, JnL_;
AO, CP: _be, happen, exist, act, ‘fare’ (‘i-fare’), get on, undergo,
suffer_, _Æ_: (+) _die_, AO, CP: (+) _attack, overcome, capture,
obtain_, AO.

farað- = faroð-

fareld = færeld

fareð- = faroð-

Fariseisc _of or belonging to the Pharisees_, OEG, WG.

farm = feorm

faroð † m. _shore_: _stream_.

faroðhengest (ea^1) m. _sea-horse, ship_, #El# 226.

faroðlācende † _swimming, sailing_. as sb. _sailors_.

faroðrīdende _sailing_, #An# 440.

faroðstrǣt † f. _path of the sea_.

faru f. _way, going, journey, course_, Æ: _expedition, march_:
_procession, retinue, companions_: _life, proceedings, adventures_, Æ:
_movable possessions_.

fas- = fæs-

fatian (NG) = fetian

fatu v. fæt.

faðe, faðu f. _father’s sister, paternal aunt_.

faðusunu m. _father’s sister’s son_, #Chr# 1119.

faul m? _evil spirit_, #Lcd# 43a.

fēa I. (±) m. _joy_, AO, CP. II. n. = feoh. III. (fēawa) adj. nap.
fēawe, superl. fēawost, fēast ‘_few_,’ _B, BH, Chr, Mt_. fēawum sīðum
_seldom_. adv. _even a little, at all_.

feadur (A) = fæder

+fēagan (NG) = +fēon

feah = feoh

±feaht I. pret. 3 sg. of feohtan. II. = feoht

feal- = fel-

+feald n. _region, abode_? #Wald# 2^10.

±fealdan^7 _to ‘fold,’ wrap up, furl_, _Æ, Bo, Rd_.

fealdestōl (y) m. _folding-stool_.

feale, fealewes v. fealu.

fealewian = fealwian

fealfor = felofor  [[under “felofearð”]]

fealg pret. 3 sg. of fēolan.

fealga v. fealh.

fealgian _to fallow_, LL 454[9] (v. A 36·71).

fealh I. f. nap. fealga _fallow_. [_Ger._ falge] II. (e) f. _‘felloe,’
felly (of a wheel)_, _Bo_. III. pret. 3 sg. of fēolan. IV. v. fala.

+fēalic _joyous, pleasant_. adv. -līce _joyously_, W 284^16.

feall = fiell

feallan^7 (±) _to ‘fall’ (‘i-falle’), fall headlong, fail, decay, die_,
_B, Ps_; AO, CP. on f. _fall on, attack_: _flow_, AO 19^18: (+)
_overthrow_, DR 115^6 (æ).

fealle f. _snare, trap_, OEG.

feall-endlic, -enlic _unstable, perishable, transient_, #Bl#, W.

fealletian ‘_concidere_,’ MkLR 5^5 (a^1).

-feallung v. feax-f.

+fealnis f. _ruin_, LkL 2^34 (æ).

fealo = (1) fealu; (2) fela

fēalōg w. g. _destitute_, #Gu# 217.

fealohilte _yellow-hilted_, #Ma# 166.

fealu I. (feale) adj. gsm. feal(e)wes, fealuwes _fallow, yellow, tawny,
dun-coloured, grey, dusky, dark_, Æ. [_Ger._ fahl] II. n. _fallow
ground_, E 179´.

fealuwian = fealwian

fealwes v. fealu.

fealwian _to become ‘fallow,’ fade, wither_, _Sol_: _grow yellow,
ripen_.

fēanes f. _‘fewness,’ paucity_, _BH, Ps_.

fear = fearr

fēar = fearh

fēara gen. of fēa.

fearh (æ, e) m. gs. fēares _little pig, hog_, #Gl#. [cp. _Ger._ ferkel]

fearhhama m. _little stem_, WW 161^5.

fearhrȳðer n. _bull_, #Bl#. [fearr]

+fearhsugu f. _sow in farrow_, WW.

fearlic _of a bull_, OEG 11^187.

fēarlic = fǣrlic

fearm m. _freight, cargo_, #Gen# 1394.

fearn n. ‘_fern_,’ _Bo, Cp_; Æ; Mdf.

fearnbed n. _fern-bed_, BC, WW.

fearoð- = faroð-

fearr I. m. _beast of burden, ox, bull_, Æ, AO. II. == feorr

feas (#VPs#) = fæs

fēasceaft † _destitute, miserable, helpless, poor_.

fēasceaftig _destitute, poor_, #Seaf# 26.

fēasceaftnes (ǣ^1) f. _poverty_, OEG 1171.

feast- = fæst-

featu (#VPs#) = fatu nap. of fæt.

fēaw- = fēa-

fēawa = fēa

fēawlic _few_, #EPs# 104^12.

fēawnes f. _fewness, paucity_.

feax (æ, e) n. _hair, head of hair_, _B, BH, Lcd_; Æ, CP. [‘_fax_’]

feaxclāð n. _cap_.

+feaxe _furnished with hair_, BH 96^11.

feaxeacan pl. _forelocks_, WW 343^33.

feaxede _long-haired (of a comet)_, _Chr_ 892. [‘_faxed_’]

+feaxen (#Nar# 37^1) = +feaxe

feaxfang m. _seizing or dragging by the hair_, LL 5[33].

feaxfeallung f. _shedding of hair, mange_, WW 113^30.

feaxhār _hoary, gray-haired_, #Rd# 73^1.

feaxnǣdel f. _crisping-pin_, WW 108^2.

feaxnes (æ, e) f. _head of hair_.

feaxnett n. _hair-net_, WW.

+feaxod = +feaxe

feaxprēon m. _hair-pin_, WW 107^38.

feaxsceacga m. _bunch of hair_.

feaxsceacgede _shaggy_.

feaxsceara (e^1) fp. _scissors for hair-cutting_? _curling-tongs_? WW
241^41.

feaxtælg? v. fæxtælg.

feaxwund f. _wound under the hair_, LL 20[45].

feb- = fef-

fec = fæc

±feccan (æ) _to ‘fetch,’ bring, bring to, draw_, _Æ, Mt_: _seek_: _gain,
take_. [= fetian]

fecele = fæcele

fecgan = feccan

fēdan _to ‘feed,’ nourish, sustain, foster, bring up_, _Bl, Mt, Ps_; Æ,
CP: _bear, bring forth, produce_. [fōda]

fēdednes = fēdnes

fēdelfugol (oe^1) m. _fatted bird_, MtR 22^4.

fēd-els, -esl m. _feeding, keep_: _fatted animal_ (_bird_?), _WW_; Cp.
[‘_feddle_’]

fēdelsswīn _fattened pig_, NC 343.

feder = fæder

federa = fædera

fēding f. ‘_feeding_,’ _CP_.

fēdnes (ǣ) f. _nourishment_, BH 88^6.

fedra = fædera

fēfer mn. gs. fēfres ‘_fever_,’ _Lk, G_; CP.

fēferādl f. ‘_fever_,’ AO.

fēferfūge f. _feverfew_. [_L._ febrifugia]

fēfersēoc _feverish_, WW 405^34.

fēfor, fēfur = fēfer

fēfrian _to be feverish, suffer from fever_, #Lcd#.

fēfrig _feverish_.

+fēg n. _joining, joint_, Æ: _composition_. [_Ger._ gefüge]

fēgan I. (±) _to join, unite, fix, adapt_, _Lcd, Rd_; Æ, CP. [‘_fay_’;
_Ger._ fügen] II. _to paint_, WW.

+fēgednes f. _conjunction, connection_: _bond, fetter_, DHy 5^6.

feger = fæger

fegere = fægre

±fēging f. _conjunction_, #ÆGr# 10^8.

+fēgnes f. _association, companionship_.

feh = feoh

+feh = +feah pret. 3 sg. of +fēon.

feht _sheepskin with the fleece on it_? TC 119; v. ES 37·177.

+feht = +feoht

fehtan (N) = feohtan

fēhð pres. 3 sg. of fōn.

fel = fell

fēl = fēol

fela (ea, eo) I. sbn. and adj. (w. g., or in agmt.; rarely inflected)
_many, much_, _B, G, Lcd_, _etc._ II. adv. _very much, many_. [‘_fele_’;
_Ger._ viel]

felaǣte ‘_mordax_,’ OEG 23^15.

felafǣcne _very treacherous_, #GnE# 148.

felafeald _manifold, many times over_, _Ps_. [‘_felefold_’]

felafealdnes (fele-) f. _multitude_, #EPs# 5^11.

felafrēcne † _very fierce, bold_.

felagēomor † _very sad, sorrowful_.

felageong _very young_, FT 53.

felageonge _having travelled much_, #Creat# 3. [gangan]

felahrōr _full of exploits_, B 27.

felaīdelsprǣce _emptily chattering_, CP 174^25.

felalēof _very dear_, #Wif# 26.

fela-meahtig, -mihtig † _most mighty_.

felamōdig † _very bold_.

±fēlan I. (w. g.) _to touch, ‘feel,’_ _AO_: _perceive_, _Rd_. II.
(#VPs#) = fēolan

felaspecol _talkative_.

fela-specolnes, -sprecolnes f. _loquacity, talkativeness_.

felasprǣce _talkative_, CP 281^14.

felasynnig _very guilty_, B 1379.

felawlonc _very stately_, #Rd# 13^7.

felawyrde _talkative_, W 40^18.

felawyrdnes f. _talkativeness_.

felcyrf n. _foreskin_.

feld m. ds. felda, felde _open or cultivated land, field, plain_, _A,
Met, RB_; AO, CP; Mdf: _battle-field_. on clǣnum felda _in the open
field (of battle)_, CP 227^25.

feldælbin (WW 352^10) = feldelfen

feldbēo f. _humble bee_, WW.

feldbisceopwyrt f. _field bishopwort_, ANS 84·325.

feldcirice f. _country church_, LL 264[5,1]; 282[3,2].

felde = fylde pret. 3 sg. of fyllan.

feldelfen f. _wood-nymph_, WW 189^6.

feldgangende † _roaming over the land_.

feldhrīðer n. _field-ox_, NC 285.

feldhūs † n. _tent_, #Ex#.

feldland n. _‘field-land,’ meadow-land, plain_, _Æ_.

feldlic _rural_, Æ.

feldmædere f. _field-madder, rosemary_, WW 300^10.

feldminte f. _field-mint, wild mint_, WW.

feld-more, -moru f. _parsnip_.

feldoxa f. _field-ox_ (i.e. an ox out to grass, not a stalled or
fat ox).

feldrude f. _wild rue_.

feldsæten f. _field_, #LPs# 77^12. [seten]

feldswamm m. _fungus, toadstool_, WW 404^26.

feldwēsten n. _desert_.

feldwōp m. _plantain_, #Gl# (?= *feldhoppe, ANS 119·435; FM 200).

feldwyrt f. _gentian_, #Lcd#.

+fēle _sensitive_, #Lcd#.

felefeald = felafeald

fēlelēas _insensible, dead_, #Wy# 40.

felg, felge f. _‘felloe,’ felly, rim of a wheel_, _Bo_. [fēolan]

felge-role, -roðe ‘_polipodium_,’ A 24·432 (v. MLN 23·186).

felh = fealh pret. 3 sg. of fēolan.

felhð (#KGl#) = fylgð pres. 3 sg. of fylgan.

feligean = fylgan

fell I. n. _‘fell,’ skin, hide_, _B, Jul, Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP. [_L._ pellis]
II. m. = fiell

fell- = fyll-

fellen (i^1) _made of skins_, Æ.

fellerēad (ēo^3; = *pællerēad? ES 43·315) _purple_, NG.

fēllun = fēollon pret. pl. of feallan.

-felma v. ǣger-f.

felmen- = fylmen-

±fēlnes f. _sensation, feeling_, Æ.

felo- = fela-

felofearð, felofor m. _name of a bird, bittern_? JGPh 2^176.

fēlon (A) = fulgon pret. pl. of fēolan.

+fēlsian = +fǣlsian

felst pres. 2 sg. of feallan.

felstycce n. _piece of skin_, #Lcd# 1·330.

felt m? n? ‘_felt_,’ _WW_.

felt-ere, -erre _a plant_, #Lcd#.

feltūn m. _privy, dunghill_, CP.

feltūngrēp f. _dunghill_, NC 285.

feltwurma m. _wild marjoram_, #Lcd#.

feltwyrt f. _mullein (plant)_.

felð = fielð pres. 3 sg. of feallan.

fēlð = fȳlð

felða (Cp 128#s#) rare gp. of feld.

felu- = felo-

fēm-, fēmn- (#VPs#) = fǣmn-

fen = fenn

fenampre (o^2) f. _a marsh plant_, #Lcd# 38b.

fencerse f. _water-cress_, _Lcd_. [‘_fencress_’]

fenester n? m? _window_, GD 220. [_L._]

fenfearn n. _marsh-fern_, _‘salvia,’ water-fern_, WW 135^4.

fenfreoðo f. _fen-refuge_, B 851.

fenfugol m. _moor-fowl_, #Lcd# 95b?

±feng m. _grip, grasp, embrace_: _capture_: _prey, booty_. [fōn]

fēng pret. 3 sg. of fōn.

fengel † m. _lord, prince, king_.

fengelād n. _marsh-path, fen_, B 1359.

fengnes f. ‘_susceptio_,’ #CPs# 82^9.

fengnett n. (_catching-_)_net_, #PPs# 140^12.

fengon pret. pl. of fōn.

fengtōð (æ) m. _canine tooth_, LL 81n16.

fenhleoðu np. _fen-coverts_, B 820. [hlið]

fenhop n. _fen-hollow_, B 764.

fenix m. _the bird ‘phœnix,’_ _ÆGr, Ph_: _date-palm_.

fenland n. _fen-land, marsh_, AO.

fenlic _marshy_, _Æ, Guth_. [‘_fenlich_’]

fenminte f. _water-mint_, #Lcd# 14b.

fenn nm. _mud, mire, dirt_, _CP, WW_: _‘fen,’ marsh, moor_, _B, Bo_; AO:
_the fen country_, _Chr_ 905.

fenn- = fen-

fennig _dirty, musty, mouldy_, _CP_ (= fynig): _marshy_, _WW_.
[‘_fenny_’]

fennðæc n. _fen-covering_, OET (Bd^2).

fenol = finul

fenompre = fenampre

fenȳce f. _marsh-frog_, #Rd# 41^71.

fēo == feoh; also ds. of feoh.

fēode pret. 3 sg. of fēogan.

fēogan (fīa, N; fēon) _to hate, persecute_, _LkL_. [‘_ivee_’]

fēogȳtsung (ēa) f. _avarice_, BH 130^34.

feoh n. gs. fēos, ds. fēo _cattle, herd_, _LL, Sol_; AO [_Ger._ vieh]:
_movable goods, property_, _Bo, Ps_; AO: _money, riches, treasure_, _BH,
Mt_; Æ, CP. wið licgendum fēo _for ready money_, ÆL 9^54: _name of the
rune for =f=_. [‘_fee_’]

feohbehāt n. _promise of money_, #Chr# 865#e#.

feohbīgenga m. _cattle-keeper_, NC 343.

feohbōt f. _money compensation_, LL 46n5; 258[51].

feohfang m. _offence of taking a bribe_, LL 318[15,1].

feohgafol n. _usury_, NC 285.

feohgehāt n. _promise of money_, #Chr# 865#a#.

feohgerēfa m. _steward_, LkLR 12^42.

feohgesceot n. _payment of money_, #Bk# 28; 29.

feohgesteald n. _possession of riches_, #Jul# 685.

feohgestrēon n. _acquiring money_: _treasure, possessions, riches_.

feohgīdsere (CP) = feohgītsere

feohgiefu f. _largess_.

feohgīetsere (CP 331^6) = feohgītsere

feohgīfre † _avaricious_.

feohgift † f. _bounty-giving, largess_.

feohgītsere m. _miser_.

feohgod n. _property (in cattle)_, LL 60n1.

feohgyrnes f. _greed_, LL 396[4].

feohhord m. _treasury_.

feohhūs n. _treasure-house_, _WW_. [‘_fee_’]

feohlǣnung f. _lending of money_, WW 115^45.

feohland ‘_pascua_,’ #PPs#.

feohlēas _without money_: _not to be bought off, past compensation_, B
2441.

feohlēasnes f. _want of money_.

feohsceatt n. _money-payment_, #Da# 744.

feohspēda fp. _riches_, GD 273^2.

feohspilling f. _waste of money_, #Chr# 1096.

feohstrang _well off_, #Gl#.

±feoht (i, o, y) n. _action of fighting_, _B, Ps_: _‘fight,’ battle_,
_AO_: _strife_, _Mod_.

±feohtan^3 (e, N) _to ‘fight,’ combat, strive_, _Chr, LL_, Æ, AO, CP.
on f. _attack, fight against_: (+) _gain by fighting, win_.

+feohtdæg m. _day of battle_, #PPs# 139^7.

feohte f. = feoht

feohtehorn (y^1) m. _battle-horn_, #PPs# 74^9.

feohtend m. _fighter_, OEG 3805.

feohtere m. _fighter_, ES 39^328.

feohtgegyrela m. _implement of war, missile, ‘falarica,’_ WW 399^30.

feohtlāc n. _fighting_, _LL_. [‘_fightlac_’]

feohtling (y^1) m. _fighter_, GD 110^13; MP 1·610.

+fēohtsumnes f. _joyfulness_, NC 292. [+fēon]

feohtwīte (i^1, y^1, y^2) n. _penalty for fighting_, LL.

feohwite n. _fine for coining false money_, LL 319 col. 2.

fēol pret. 3 sg. of feallan.

fēol (ē, ī) f. ‘_file_,’ _Rd_; ÆL.

feola = fela

fēolaga m. _partner, ‘fellow,’_ _Chr_ 1016#d#. [_ON._ fēlage]

±fēolan^3 (ē) _to cleave, be joined to, adhere_: _enter, penetrate, pass
into, through or over, betake oneself to_, #Chr#: _undergo_: _persevere
in_. [_Goth._ filhan]

fēold pret. 3 sg. of fealdan.

feolde = folde

fēoldon pret. pl. of fealdan.

fēolheard _hard as a file_? _hard enough to resist the file_? #Ma# 108
(or ?= *felaheard).

fēolian _to file_, ÆL 32^203.

fēoll pret. 3 sg., fēollon pret. pl. of feallan.

feolu = fela

feolu-fer, -ferð, -for = felofor  [[under “felofearð”]]

feon = fenn

fēon I. (±, usu. +) sv^5 w. in or g. _to be glad, rejoice, exult_, CP.
II. = fēogan

fēond (ie, y) m. ds. fīend, fēonde, nap. fīend, fēond, _adversary, foe,
enemy_, _A, B, Mt_; AO, CP [f. = _female enemy_]: _‘fiend,’ devil_,
_Gu_; CP: _the Devil_, _Lcd, Hy_. [pres. ptc. of fēogan]

fēondǣt m. _eating things sacrificed to idols_, #PPs# 105^24.

fēondgrāp f. _grip of a foe_, B 636.

fēondgyld n. _idolatry, idol_, GD, #PPs#: _demoniacal possession_?
MtL 4^24.

fēondlic _hateful, hostile, fiendish_, _WW_; Æ. adv. -līce, _Jul_.
[‘_fiendly_’]

fēondrǣden f. _enmity_, Æ.

fēondrǣs m. _hostile attack_, #Gen# 900.

fēondsceaða † m. _enemy, robber_.

fēondscipe m. _hostility, enmity, hatred_, AO, CP.

fēondsēoc _possessed with a devil, demoniac_, BH 184^5.

fēondulf m. _public enemy, criminal, malefactor_. [fēond, wulf]

fēong = fēoung

feonn = fenn

feor = feorr, feorran-

fēor = feorh, fēower

fēora gp. of feorh.

+fēora = +fēra

feorbūend _dwelling far off_, B 254.

feorcumen = feorrancumen

feorcund = feorrancund

feorcȳðð f. _distant land_, B 1838.

feord = fierd

feord- = fierd-, fyrd-

fēores gs. of feorh.

feorg == feorh

feorh (e) mn. gs. fēores; nap. feorh _life, principle of life, soul,
spirit_, AO, CP. tō wīdan fēore _for eternity, for ever_. f. gesellan,
āgiefan _to die_: _living being, person_.

feorhādl f. _fatal disease_, Æ.

feorhbana m. _man-slayer_.

feorhbealu † n. _deadly evil, violent death_.

feorhbenn f. _deadly wound_, B 2740.

feorhberend † m. _living being_.

feorhbold n. _body_, #Rood# 73.

feorhbona = feorhbana

feorhbora m. _life-bearer_, #Rd# 92^2.

feorhcwalu † (e) f. _slaughter, death_.

feorhcwealm † m. _slaughter, death_.

feorhcynn † n. _race of mortals_.

feorhdagas mp. _days of life_, #Gen# 2358.

feorhdolg n. _deadly wound_, #Cr# 1455.

feorhēacen _living_, #Gen# 204.

feorhfægen _fain of life, glad to preserve one’s life_, ÆL 23^309.

feorhgebeorh n. _refuge_, #Ex# 369.

feorhgedāl † n. _death_.

feorhgener n. _preservation of life_, LL 204[7,3].

feorhgenīðla † m. _mortal foe_.

feorhgiefa † m. _giver of life_.

feorhgiefu f. _gift of life_, #Rim# 6?

feorh-gōme? f. _means of subsistence_? -gōma? m. _jaw_? #Cr# 1547.

feorhhord † n. _breast, soul, spirit_.

feorhhūs n. _soul-house, body_, #Ma# 297.

feorhhyrde m. _life’s guardian, protector_.

feorhlāst m. _step taken to preserve life, flight_, B 846.

feorhlēan n. _revenge for bloodshed_? _gift of life_? #Ex# 150.

feorhlegu † f. _life_.

feorhlic (fera-, ferh-) _vital_, #HGl# 453.

feorhlīf n. _life_, #PPs# 142^2.

feorhloca m. _breast_, #Gu# 625.

feorhlyre m. _loss of life_, LL 466[3].

feorhneru f. _preservation of life, refuge, salvation_: _nourishment of
life, food_.

feorhrǣd m. _salvation_, #An# 1656.

feorhscyldig _guilty of death_, LL.

feorhsēoc _mortally wounded_, B 820.

feorhsweng m. _fatal blow_, B 2489.

feorhðearf f. _urgent need_, #PPs# 69^1.

feorhwund f. _deadly wound_, B 2385.

feorlen = fyrlen

feorlic _far off, alien, strange_, #Kl# 100^97.

feorlond n. _distant land_, #Pa# 10.

feorm (a, æ, o, y) f. _food, provision, sustenance_: _entertainment,
meal, feast, supper_, Æ, AO, CP: _goods, possessions_: _stores_: _rent
in kind_, EC: _profit, benefit_, _CP_: _tilling_, LL 454, 8 (y).

feorma = forma

feormehām m. _farm_, #Chr# 1087.

feormend m. _entertainer_: _cleanser, polisher, furbisher_.

feormendlēas _wanting a burnisher_, B 2761.

feormere m. _purveyor_, KC 4·278^21.

feormfultum m. _help in food_, LL 356[69,1].

±feormian _to entertain, receive as guest_: _cherish, support, sustain,
feed_: _consume_: _benefit, profit_: _scour, cleanse, furbish_: (+)
_harbour (stolen goods)_, LL 108[4,6].

feormung f. _harbouring_, LL: _furbishing, cleansing_, LL.

feornes f. _distance_, BH 72^10.

feorr I. comp. fi(e)rra, fyrra; sup. fierresta _‘far,’ remote, distant_,
_BH, Chr, RB_; CP. II. adv. comp. fierr, firr, fyr(r); sup. fi(e)rrest,
fyrrest _‘far,’ far away, distant, remote_, CP: _far back (in time)_:
_further, besides, moreover_.

feorran I. adv. _from afar, from a remote time or place_, _B, El, Gen_:
_far off, at a distance_, _Bo_; Æ, CP. [‘_ferren_’] II. (æ, y) _to
remove, avert, turn aside, withdraw_, _B_: _proscribe_. [‘_far_’]

feorrancumen _come from afar, strange_.

feorrancund, feorrcund _come from afar, foreign born_.

feorrane, feorren(e) = feorran I.

feorrfaran^6 ‘_vexari_,’ LkL 7^6 (i^1).

feorrian _to keep apart_, Æ: (+) _depart_, NG (ea).

feorrung f. _removal, departure_, GD 49^16.

feorsian _to go beyond_: _put far from, expel_: _depart, remove,
separate_.

feorsn = fiersn

feorstuð nf. _support_, WW.

feorting f. ‘_pedatio_,’ WW 162^42.

feorð = ferhð

fēorða (ēa, N) ‘_fourth_,’ _Lk_; AO, CP. fēorðe healf _three and a
half_.

feorðe _fourthly_, LL 158[15].

fēorð-ling, -ung m. _fourth part_: ‘_farthing_,’ _MkL, LkL_; Æ.
[‘_ferling_’]

fēorum dp. of feorh.

feorweg m. _remote part_.

feorwit = fyrwit

fēos gs. of feoh.

feostnode (#Chr# 963#e#) = fæstnode pret. 3 sg. of fæstnian.

feot- = fet-

fēoð pres. 3 sg. of fēogan.

fēoðer-, fēoðor- = fēower-

fēoung f. _hatred_, CP. [fēogan]

feow-, fēower- v. also fiðer-.

fēower, fēowere [indecl. before a sb. but when alone, usu. g. fēow(e)ra,
d. fēowerum] ‘_four_,’ _Cr_; Æ, AO, CP: _four times_.

fēowerdōgor mn. and adj. _four days_.

fēower-ecge, -ecgede _four-cornered, square_, #Lcd#.

fēowerfeald _fourfold_, Lk 19^8.

fēowerfealdlīce _quadruply_, #Bl#.

fēowerfēte _four-footed_, _AO_; Æ. [‘_four-foot_’]

fēower-fōt, -fōtede _four-footed_.

fēowergild n. _fourfold compensation_, LL 228´.

fēowerhwēolod (fȳr-) _four-wheeled_? RHy 4^19. (v. ES 38·15)

fēowerscȳte _four-cornered, square_, AO. [scēat]

fēowertēme (fēoður-) _four-teamed_, VHy.

fēower-tēoða, -tēogða, ‘_fourteenth_,’ _BH, MH_; AO.

fēowertīene (ē^3, ȳ^3) ‘_fourteen_,’ _MtL_; AO.

fēowertig ‘_forty_,’ _MtL_; AO.

fēowertigfeald _fortyfold_.

fēowertiglic _quadragesimal_, BH.

fēowertigoða ‘_fortieth_,’ _Æ_.

fēowertȳne = fēowertīene

fēowerða (_Mt_) = fēorða

fēowr- = fēower-, fēor-

fēowra v. fēower.

±fēowung f. _rejoicing, joy_, OEG 1118. [+fēon]

fēowur- = fēower-

fer = fær

fer- = fær-, fear-, fier-, feor-, for-, fyr-

fēr = (1) fǣr I.; (2) fēfer

fēr- = fǣr-, fȳr

±fēra m. _associate, comrade, fellow-disciple_, AO, CP: _wife_: _man,
servant_, v. LL 2·427f.

fēran _to go, come, set out, march, travel_, _B_; JnL (oe), CP: _behave,
act_: (+) _accomplish, attain, obtain_: (+) _fare, speed, undergo,
suffer_. [‘_fere_’]

fērbedd n. _portable bed_.

fērblǣd = fǣrblǣd

fercian _to convey, bring_, _Chr_: _support_, ÆL 23^597: _stuff up (with
lies)_, ÆL 23^713. [‘_ferk, firk_’]

fercung f. _sustenance, provision, food_, Æ (9^172).

ferdwyrt (ferw-)? _a plant_, ANS 84·325 (or ?= feld-).

fēre _able to go, fit for (military) service_.

+fēre I. f. _company, community_. II. _accessible_, #Ph# 4. [faran]

ferele f. _rod_, GD. [_L._ ferula]

fērend m. _sailor_: _messenger_.

fereð pres. 3 sg. of (1) faran, (2) ferian.

fēreð pres. 3 sg. of fēran.

fergan = ferian

ferht I. _honest_, #Gl#. II. = ferhð

ferhtlic _just, honest_, #PPs# 95^10.

ferhð † (ferð) mn. _mind, intellect, soul, spirit_: _life_. wīdan f.
_eternally, for ever_.

ferhðbana m. _murderer_, #Ex# 399.

ferhðcearig _of anxious mind_, #Gen# 2217.

ferhð-cleofa, -cofa † m. _breast_.

ferhðfrec _bold, brave_, B 1146.

ferhðfrīðende (rð) _sustaining life_, #Rd# 39^3.

ferhðgenīðla m. _mortal enemy_, B 2881.

ferhðgewit (rð) n. _understanding_, #Cr# 1184.

ferhðglēaw † _wise, prudent_.

ferhðgrim (rð) † _savage_.

ferhðloca † m. _breast, body_.

ferhðlufu f. _heartfelt love_, #An# 83 (y).

ferhðsefa † (i, y) m. _mind, thought_.

ferhðwērig † _soul-weary, sad_.

±ferian _to carry, convey, bring_, _An, B, El_; Æ: (with refl. a.)
_betake oneself to, be versed in_: _depart, go_, _Ma_. [‘_ferry_’]

feriend m. _leader, bringer_, #Sol# 80.

fēring I. † f. _journey, wandering_. [fēran] II. f. ‘_insimulatio_,’
#Gl#. [fǣr]

+fērlǣcan (ē) _to associate, unite_, Æ.

+fērlic _associated_. adv. -līce _sociably, together_; -līðlīce GD
313^24.

±fērnes f. _passage, transition, passing away_.

+fērrǣden (usu. +) f. _companionship, fellowship_, Æ, AO, CP:
_friendship_: _society, fraternity, congregation_, Æ.

fers nm. _verse_: _sentence_. [_L._]

fersc _‘fresh’ (not salt)_, _AO_: _not salted_, _KC_.

-ferscan v. ā-f.

fersceta m. _freshet_, A 20·382.

±fērscipe m. _fraternity, community, retinue_: _society, fellowship,
companionship_, CP.

+fērscipian _to unite, accompany_, DR.

fersian _to versify_, #ÆGr# 218^3.

ferð == ferhð

ferða m. _skin, hide_? A 30^253.

ferðan = furðum

fēsan = fȳsan

fēsian = fȳsian

fest == fæst

fēst = fȳst

fester- = fōstor-

festnung f. _munificence_, WW 440^17.

fēstrian = fōstrian

fet pres. 3 sg. of fetian.

fēt I. pres. 3 sg. of fēdan. II. ds. and nap. of fōt.

+fetan^4 _to fall_, MtR 13^7,8.

fetel m. _belt_, _Bo, Met_. [‘_fettle_’]

fetelhilt n. _belted or ringed sword-hilt_, B 1563.

fētels = fǣtels

fetelsian _to provide with a sheath_? BC 3·215^2. +fetelsod
_ornamented_? (BT), _belted_? _ringed_?

feter == fetor

+feterian † _to fetter, bind_.

±fetian (æ) _to bring near, fetch_, _B, Gen_: _bring on, induce_:
_marry_. [= feccan]

fetor (eo^1, e^2) f. _‘fetter,’ shackle_, _Cp, MkL, Ps_: _check,
restraint_, _Wa_.

fetorwrāsen f. _fetter, chain_, #An# 1109.

+fetran, +fetrian = +feterian

fētt I. pres. 3 sg. of fēdan. II. = fǣtt

fettan = fetian

fette pret. 3 sg. of fetian.

fēð = fēhð pres. 3 sg. of fōn.

fēða m. _foot-soldier_, AO: _band of foot-soldiers, troop_, Æ: _warfare,
battle_? #Jul# 389.

fēðan _to lead_, Æ: _go on foot_? Æ (9^449).

fēðe n. _power of locomotion, walking, gait, pace_, Æ, AO.

fēðecempa † m. _foot-soldier_.

fēðegang m. _journey on foot_, #Gen# 2513.

fēðegeorn _anxious to go_, #Rd# 32^9.

fēðegest † m. _guest coming on foot, traveller_.

fēðehere m. _infantry_, AO.

fēðehwearf m. _band of footmen_, #Gu# 162.

fēðelāst † m. _step, track, course_.

fēðelēas † _footless, crippled_.

fēðemenn mp. _infantry_, NG, WW.

fēðemund f. _fore-paw_, #Rd# 16^17.

feðer (æ) f. nap. feð(e)ra, feðre ‘_feather_,’ _Lcd, Ph_; pl. _wings_,
_Bo, Mt, OET_; CP: _pen_, _Lk_; CP.

feðer- = fēower-, fiðer-

feðeran = fiðerian

feðerbǣre _provided with feathers, winged_, GPH 390.

feðerbedd n. _feather-bed_, WW 124^19.

feðerberend _provided with feathers, feathered_, WW 465^20.

feðercræft m. _embroidery_, WW 491^3.

feðergearwe fp. _feathers of the arrow_, B 3119.

feðergeweorc n. _feather-embroidery_.

feðerhama m. _wings, plumage_, _Cp, Gen_. [‘_featherham_’]

fēðespēdig _speedy of foot_, #Cra# 53.

fēðewīg † m. _battle on foot, affray_.

feðm = fæðm

feðorbyrste _split into four_, #Lcd# 148a (A 30·129).

feðra, feðre v. feðer.

feðrian _to become fledged_, OEG 26^27.

+fēðrian _to load_, AS 1^11. [fōðor]

feðriht _feathered_, MtL p7^17.

fēðu (WW 110^29) = fēða

fēðung f. _walking, motion_, Æ.

fex == feax

fīag- (N) = fēog-

fibulae (#Gl#) = fīfele

+fic n. _deceit_. [v. ‘_fickle_’]

fīc m. _fig, fig-tree_: _(fig-disease), venereal ulcer, hemorrhoids_,
#Lcd#. [_L._ ficus]

fīcādl f. _fig-disease_ (v. fīc).

fīcæppel m. _fig_.

fīcbēam m. _fig-tree_, Æ, CP.

-fician v. be-f.

fīclēaf n. _fig-leaf_.

ficol _‘fickle,’ cunning, tricky_, _KGl_; W.

fīctrēow n. _fig-tree_.

ficung f. _fraud, trickery_, LL 242[24]; 254[28,2].

fīcwyrm m. _intestinal worm_, #Lcd# 122a.

fīcwyrt f. _fig-wort_, WW 134^32.

fīeftīene = fīftīene

fieht pres. 3 sg. of feohtan.

±fiell (æ, e, ea, y) mn. _fall, destruction_, AO, CP: _death,
slaughter_: _precipice_: _case, inflection_, #ÆGr# 91^14 (y). [feallan]

fiell- v. fyll.

fielt pres. 3 sg. of fealdan.

fielð pres. 3 sg. of feallan.

fīend = fēond, also ds. of fēond.

+fīend (ȳ) mp _foes, enemies_, _Lk_. [‘_i-feond_’]

fīendwīc n. _enemy’s camp_, #LPs# 77^28.

fier v. feorr II.

fīer- = fēower-

fierd (æ, e, eo, y) f. _national levy or army_, _Chr_: _military
expedition, campaign_, _Ma, PPs_; AO: _camp_. [‘_ferd_’]

fierd- v. also fyrd-.

fierdian (y) _to go on an expedition, march_, #Chr#.

fierdlēas _without an army, undefended, unprotected_, #Chr# 894#a#.

fieren- = firen-

fīerfēte = fēowerfēte

-fierme (eo) v. or-f.  [[under “orfeorme”]]

fierra, fierrest, fierresta v. feorr II.

fiersn (e, eo, y) f. _heel_. [_Ger._ ferse]

fierst = first

fīf usu. indecl. before sb.; but when alone, has na. fīfe, g. fīfa, d.
fīfum ‘_five_,’ _A, Gen, Mt_.

fīfalde f. _butterfly_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ falter]

fīfbēc fp. _Pentateuch_, WW 470^8.

fife v. fīf.

fīfecgede _having five angles_, #ÆGr# 289^15.

fīfel n. _(huge) sea-monster, giant_, #Wald# 2^10.

fīfelcynn n. _race of sea-monsters_, B 104.

fīfeldōr n. _door of sea-monsters, river Eider_, #Wid# 43.

fīfele f. _buckle_, WW 403^7. [_L._ ‘_fibula_’]

fīfelfota ‘_petilus_,’ A 8·449.

fīfelstrēam m. _ocean, sea_, #Met# 26^26.

fīfelwǣg m. _ocean, sea_, #El# 237.

fīffalde = fīfalde

fīffeald ‘_five-fold_,’ _Æ_: _five each_, CM 840.

fīffēted _five-footed_, OEG 130.

fīffingre f. _‘potentilla_,’ ‘_primula,’ cinquefoil, oxlip_? _Lcd_.
[‘_fivefinger_’]

fīfflēre _five-storied_, Æ. [flōr]

fīfgēar n. _period of five years, lustrum_, WW 431^16.

fīf-hund, -hundred num. _five hundred_.

fīflæppede _having five lobes_, #Lcd# 59b.

fīf-lēaf n., -lēafe f. _‘potentilla,’ cinquefoil_, _Lcd_. [‘_fiveleaf_’]

fīfmægen n. _magic power_, #Sol# 136. [fīfel, mægen]

fīfnihte _five days old_, #Ans# 129·22.

fīfta ‘_fifth_,’ _Æ, Mk_; AO, CP.

fīftafæder v. fæder.

fīfte _fifthly_, LL 158[16].

fīfteg = fīftig

fīftegða = fīftēoða

fīftēne = fīftīene

fīfteogoða ‘_fiftieth_,’ _Æ_; CP.

fīf-tēoða (ȳ^1). -tēða, -tegða ‘_fifteenth_,’ _BH, Lcd_.

fīftīene (ȳ^1, ē^2, ȳ^2) (often w. g.) ‘_fifteen_,’ _A, B, Gu_; AO.

fīftīenewintre (e^2) _fifteen years old_, #Bl# 213^1.

fīftig num. ‘_fifty_,’ _Æ_: sb. _a set of fifty_, _Mk_.

Fiftigdæg m. _Pentecost_, MkL p5^10.

fīftigeða, fīttigoða = fīfteogoða

fīftigfeald _‘fiftyfold,’ containing fifty_, _Æ_.

fīftȳne (Æ) = fīftīene

fīfwintre _five years old_, #ÆGr# 287^14.

fīgan^1 ‘_frigere_,’ Ep.

fihl n? _cloth, rag_, NG. [?= fliht]

fiht I. pres. 3 sg. of feohtan. II. = feht

fiht- = fyht-

fīhtan = fȳhtan

+fihð pres. 3 sg. of +fēon.

fīl (#Gl#) = fēol

+fīlan = +fȳlan

+filce = +fylce

fild sb. _milking_, #Lcd# 53b.

fildcumb m. _milk-pail_, #Lcd# 122b.

filde _field-like, of the nature of a plain_, AO 74^12.

+filde n. _field, plain_, AO 12^10. [feld]

filgð, filhð pres. 3 sg. of fēolan.

fili- = fylg-

fīllende ptc. _rubbing_, WW 407^36.

filiðe n. _hay_.

filiðlēag m. _meadow_, Ct.

fill == fyll

fille _thyme_? OEG 56^38. [= cerfille?]

fillen = fellen

filmen (y) n. _‘film,’ membrane, thin skin_, _Lcd_; Æ: _foreskin_, Æ.

filst- = fylst-

filð pres. 3 sg. of feallan.

fīn f. _heap, pile_. v. OEG 2456.

fīna m. _woodpecker_, WW 49^2.

finc m. ‘_finch_,’ _Ep, WW_.

fīnd = fīend

findan^3 (but occl. wk. pret. funde) (±) _to find, meet with_, _B, Gen,
Jul, Met_: _discover, obtain by search or study_, _Cr, MtL, Ps_:
_provide_: _consider, devise, arrange, dispose, decide_, AO, CP: _show,
inform_. f. æt _obtain from_.

findend m. _finder_, GPH 391.

±findig (ȳ) _capable_, #ÆGr# 69^4.

finding f. _invention, initiative_, CM 1082.

finel = finul

finger m. ‘_finger_,’ _Mt, VPs_; Æ, CP.

finger-æppla, -appla npl. _finger-shaped fruits, dates_, ÆL, OEG.

fingerdocca? m? _finger-muscle_, #Gl#.

fingerlic _belonging to a finger or ring_, WW 291^26.

fingarlið n. _finger-joint_, NC 343.

fingermæl n. _finger’s length_, NR 22^8.

finig (y) = fynig

finiht _finny_.

finn m. ‘_fin_,’ _Æ_.

finol == finul

finst = findest pres. 2 sg. of findan.

fint pres. 3 sg. of findan.

finta † m. _tail_: _consequence, result_.

finul (e^1, y^1, o^2), finugl m., finu(g)le ‘_fennel_,’ _Ep, WW_. [_L._
foenuculum]

finulsǣd (o^2) n. _fennel-seed_, #Lcd# 157a.

fīo == fēo

fīr = fȳr

fīras † mp. _men, human beings_.

fird = fierd

fird- = fierd-, fyrd-

firen f. _transgression, sin, crime_: _outrage, violence_: _torment,
suffering_.

firenbealu n. _transgression_, #Cr# 1276.

firencræft m. _wickedness_, #Jul# 14.

firendǣd † f. _wicked deed, crime_.

firenearfeðe n. _sinful woe_, #Gen# 709.

firenfremmende _sinful_, #Cr# 1118.

firenful (y) _sinful, wicked_.

firengeorn _sinful_, #Cr# 1606.

firenhicga (y^1, y^2) m. _adulterer_, GPH 389.

firenhicge (fyrn-) f. _adulteress_, OEG.

firenhicgend (fyrn-) _adulterous_, OEG.

±firenian (y) _to sin_: _commit adultery_; _revile_.

firenlic (y) _wicked_. adv. -līce _vehemently, rashly_, #Wald# 1^20.

firenligerian _to commit fornication_, #RSPs# 105^39.

firenlust m. _lust, sinful desire, luxury, wantonness_, AO, CP.

firenlustful _wanton, luxurious_, A 12·502^10.

firenlustgeorn _wanton_, W 253^5.

firensynnig _sinful_, #Cr# 1379.

firentācnian (y) _to commit misdeeds_, RHy 6^21.

firenðearf (y) f. _dire distress_, B 14.

firenum _excessively, very, intensely_: _malignantly_. [dp. of firen]

firenweorc † n. _evil deed, sin_.

firenwyrcende † _sinning, sinful_.

firenwyrhta (y) † m. _evil-doer_.

fīrfoda = fȳrfoda  [[headword spelled “fȳrfōda”]]

firgen _mountain, mountain-woodland_. [?only in compounds]

  [[Entry from first edition; note “only in compounds”.]]

firgenbēam (y) m. _mountain tree_, B 1414. [_Goth._ fairguni]

firgenbeorg (fergenberig) _mountain_, #Rune-Casket#.

firgenbucca m. _ibex_, #Lcd#.

firgendstrēam = firgenstrēam

firgen-gāt f. nap. -gǣt _ibex_, #Gl#.

firgenheafod n. _mountain-headland_.

firgenholt n. _mountain-wood_, B 1393.

firgenstrēam † m. _mountain-stream, woodland-stream_.

firgin- = firgen-

firht = freht

firhð == ferhð

firigendstrēam = firgenstrēam

firinggāt = firgengāt

firmdig = frymdig

firmettan _to ask, beg_, AO 186^6.

firn- = firen-, fyrn-

firr, firra, firre, firrest v. feorr.

first I. (e, ie, y) mn. _period, space of time, time, respite, truce_,
_B, Chr_; CP. [‘_frist_’] II. (ie) f. _ceiling_, Ep. [_Ger._ first] III.
= fyrst

firsthrōf n. _ceiling_.

first-mearc, -gemearc f. _period of time, appointed time, interval,
respite_.

firð- = fyrð-

firwet- = fyrwit-

fisc m. ‘_fish_,’ _VPs_; Æ, AO, CP; Mdf.

fisc-að, -(n)oð m. _fishing_, AO. _fishpond_: _a catch of fish_.
[v. NC 286]

fiscbrȳne m. _fish-brine_, WW 128^39.

fisccynn n. _fish tribe_, Æ.

fiscdēah f. _fish-dye, purple_, OEG 5193.

fiscere m. _‘fisher,’ fisherman_, _AO, Mt_: _kingfisher (bird)_.

fiscfell (NG) = fiscpōl

fiscflōdu? m. _fish-flood, sea_, OET.

fischūs n. _place where fish is sold_, WW 184^40.

fiscian _to ‘fish,’_ _Bo_.

fiscmere m. _fishpond_, WW 484^11.

fiscnað = fiscað

fiscnett n. _fishing-net_.

fiscnoð, fiscoð = fiscað

fiscpōl m. _fishpond_, _JnL, WW_. [‘_fishpool_’]

fiscðrūt m. _small fish_, MtL 15^34.

fiscwelle I. m. _fishpond_, A 13·321. II. = fiscwylle

fiscwer m. _fish-weir, fish-trap_, LL 454[9].

fiscwylle _full of fish_, BH. [weallan]

fisting f. ‘_fesiculatio_,’ WW.

fitelfōta _thin, slender_, WW 161^20.

fitersticca m. _tent-nail_, WW 187^5 (?= fiðersticca).

fitt I. f? _struggle, contest, fight_, #Gen# 2072. II. f. _‘fit,’ song,
poem_, _Bo_; #Gl#. [? connected with I. v. #SkED# under fit (2)]

fiðele f. _fiddle_.

fiðelere m. ‘_fiddler_,’ _WW_ 311^23.

fiðelestre f. _female fiddler_, WW 311^24.

fiðer- = fēower-, feðer-

fiðercian _to flutter_, GD 100^19. [fiðere]

fiðerdǣled _quadripartite, quartered_, OEG.

fiðere (y) n. nap. fið(e)ru, fiðera(s) _wing_, Æ, CP.

fiðerfeald ‘_quadriga_,’ EHy 4^19.

fiðerflēdende (y^1) _flowing in four streams_, GPH 390.

fiðerflōwende _flowing in four streams_, OEG 48^2.

fiðerhama m. _wing-covering_, ÆL 34^74 (y^1).

+fiðerhamod _covered with feathers_, ÆH 1·466^27.

fiðerhīwe ‘_quadriformis_,’ OEG 177.

+fiðerian, fiðrian _to provide with feathers, or wings_.

fiðerlēas _without wings_, Wy 22.

fiðerrīce (y) n. _tetrarchy_, #Chr# 12#c#.

fiðerscēatas mp. _four quarters_? #Sol# 32.

fiðersleht m. _flapping of wings, joy_? OEG 4892.

fiðru v. fiðere.

fixa, fixas, fixum = fisca, fiscas, fiscum, gp., nap. and dp. of fisc.

fixen == fyxen

fixian, fixoð, fixnoð = fiscian, fiscað

flā f. _arrow_, _AO_. [‘_flo_’; = flān]

flacg _cataplasm, plaster_, WW 380^28.

flacor † _flying (of arrows)_. [cp. _Ger._ flackern]

flæ- = flea-, fleo-

flǣ- = flā-, flēa-, flēo-, flīe-

flǣc = flǣsc

flǣre f. _earlap_, WW 157^12.

flǣsc (ē) n. ‘_flesh_,’ _Æ, Cp, Lk, VP_; CP: _body (as opposed to
soul)_, _B, Jn_: _carnal nature_, _Mt_: _living creatures_, _Lk, Ps_.

flǣscǣt m. _animal food_, RB.

flǣscbana m. _murderer_, GD.

flǣsccofa m. _body_, #LPs# 118^120.

flǣsccȳping f. _meat-market_, WW 145^26.

flǣsceht _fleshy_, #Lcd# 83a.

flǣscen _of flesh, like flesh_, _GPH_; Æ. [‘_fleshen_’]

flǣscennes = flǣscnes

flǣscgebyrd f. _incarnation_, OEG 429.

flǣschama (o^2) † m. _body, carcase_.

+flǣschamod _incarnate_, Æ.

flǣschord † n. _body_.

flǣschūs n. _‘flesh-house,’ place where meat is sold_, _WW_.

flǣsclic _‘fleshly,’ corporeal, carnal_, _Æ, BH_.

flǣsclīcnes f. _incarnate condition_, _Æ_. [‘_fleshliness_’]

flǣscmangere m. _butcher_, _WW_. [‘_flesh-monger_’]

flǣscmaðu f. _maggot_, WW 122^13.

flǣsc-mete m. nap. -mettas _flesh, animal food_, _LL_; Æ, CP.
[‘_fleshmeat_’]

±flǣscnes f. _incarnation_, #Chr#.

+flǣscod _incarnate_, Æ.

flǣscsand _portion of meat_, NC 287.

flǣscstrǣt f. _meat-market_, Æ.

flǣsctāwere m. _torturer of the flesh, executioner_, WW 189^19.

flǣsctōð m. _one of the teeth_, WW 415^24.

flǣscðēnung f. _use as food_, NC 287.

flǣscwellere m. _executioner, hangman_, WW 382^29. [flǣsc, cwellere]

flǣscwyrm m. _maggot_, _Lcd_. [‘_fleshworm_’]

flǣslic = flǣsclic

flæðecomb m. _weaver’s comb_, WW.

flæx (MtR) = fleax

flagen pp. of flēan.

flāh I. n. _wickedness, treachery_, #Rim# 47. II. † adj. _wily,
deceitful, hostile_.

flān mf. _barb, arrow, javelin, dart_, _B, Ma, Æ_; AO, CP. [‘_flane_’]

flānboga † m. _bow_.

flanc m. _flank_, OEG 50^35.

flāngeweorc † n. _shooting-gear, arrows_.

flānhred? _arrow-swift_? _arrow-equipped_? (_of death_), #Rim# 72.

flāniht _relating to darts_, WW 425^34.

flānðracu † f. _onset, attack_.

flasce (x) f. _‘flask,’ bottle_.

flāt pres. 3 sg. of flītan.

flaxe (_GD, WW_) = flasce

flaxfōte _web-footed_. [= flox-]

flēa I. mf. ‘_flea_,’ _Ep, Lcd_. II. = flēah n.

flēag pret. 3 sg. of flēogan.

flēah I. n. _albugo, a white spot in the eye_, CP. II. m. = flēa I. III.
pret. 3 sg. of flēogan. IV. pret. 3 sg. of flēon.

flēam m. _flight_, AO, Æ. on f. gebrengan _to put to flight_. on f.
weorðan _to flee_.

flēamdōm m. _flight_, NC 287.

flēamlāst m. _apostacy_, WW 500^3.

flēan^6 _to ‘flay,’_ _Cp_.

±fleard n. _nonsense, folly, deception, fraud, superstition_, _LL_; OEG.
[‘_flerd_’]

fleardere m. _trifler_, NC 287.

fleardian _to be foolish, err, go astray_: _grow luxuriantly_.

flēat I. pret. 3 sg. of flēotan. II. = flēot

flēawyrt f. _fleabane_, _WW_. [‘_fleawort_’]

fleax (æ, e) n. _‘flax,’ linen_, _CP_; Æ (e).

fleax- = flex-

flecta = fleohta

fled = flett

-flēdan v. ofer-f.

flēde adj. _in flood, full, overflowing_, AO. [flōd]

flēding f. _flowing_, Æ.

flēg- = flēog-

flēge _little ship_, JnL 6^22 (oe).

flehta = fleohta

flēm- = flīem-

flene = flyne

flēo = flēa

±flēogan^2 (intr., cp. flēon) _to ‘fly,’_ _B, El, Jud, Jul_; Æ, CP:
_flee, take to flight_, _Ma_. [_Ger._ fliegen]

flēoge (ē, ȳ) f. _any winged insect, ‘fly,’_ _Æ_; CP. [_Ger._ fliege]

flēogenda m. _bird_, _CPs_.

flēogende _flying, winged_, #ÆGr# 44^9.

flēogendlic _flying, winged_, #ÆGr# 55^2.

flēogryft n. _fly-curtain_, WW 373^21.

flēohcynn m. _a kind of flies_, #PPs# 104^27.

flēohnet n. _‘fly-net,’ curtain_, _Jud_.

fleohta (flecta) m. _hurdle_.

±flēon^2 _to fly from_, _‘flee,’ avoid, escape_, _G, Met, VPs_; AO, CP:
_put to flight_, Æ: _fly_ (intr.), _Æ_.

flēos (#VPs#) = flīes

fleos- = fles-

flēot (ēa) m. flēota f. _water, sea, estuary, river_, _AO_: _raft,
ship_, _Hy_. [‘_fleet_’]

flēotan^2 _to float, drift, flow, swim, sail_, _Æ, CP_: (tr.) _skim_,
#Lcd#. [‘_fleet_’]

flēote (or ? flēota) = flēot

flēotende _floating_, _Gen_ 1447. [‘_fleeting_’]

flēotig _fleet, swift_, #Rd# 52^4.

flēotwyrt f. _seaweed_, #Lcd# 101a.

fleoðe (ea) f. _water-lily_, #Lcd#.

flēow pret. 3 sg. of flōwan.

flēowð = flēwð pres. 3 sg. of flōwan.

-flēre v. ðri-, fīf-f.

flēring f. _story (of a building)_, Æ. [flōr]

flēs = flīes

flēsc == flǣsc

fleswian (eo) _to whisper_? _pull a wry face_? BH 122^17 (JAW 30). [or ?
flēswian _dissemble_, ES 44·470]

flet == flett

flēt, flēte = flīete

fletræst f. _couch_, B 1241.

fletsittend † m. _sitter in hall, courtier, guest_.

flett n. _floor, ground_, _B_: _dwelling, hall, mansion_. [‘_flet_’]

flettgefeoht n. _fighting in a house_, LL 18[39].

flettgesteald † n. _household goods_.

flettpǣð m. _floor of a house_, #Gen# 2729.

fletwerod n. _hall-troop, body-guard_, B 476.

fleðecamb = flæðecomb

flēwsa m. _flowing, flux, issue (bodily disorder)_, #Lcd#. [flōwan]

flēwð pres. 3 sg. of flōwan.

flex = fleax

flexæcer m. _flax land_, KC 5·389^16.

flexgescot n. _contribution of flax_.

flexlīne f. _flax-winder, reel_? _flax line_? _thread_? LL 455[15].

+flīan, +flȳn _to drive out_. [flēon]

flicce n. _‘flitch’ of bacon, ham_, _CD, Gl, WW_.

flicorian, flicerian _to move the wings, flutter_, _Æ_. [‘_flicker_’]

flīe = flēah I.

flīehð pres. 3 sg. of flēon.

flīema (ē, ī, ȳ) m. _fugitive, exile, outlaw_, AO. Godes f.
_excommunicate person_, LL 352[66]. [flēam]

±flīeman (ǣ, ē, ȳ) _to put to flight, drive away, banish_, _Gen_; CP.
[‘_fleme_’; flēam]

flīeman-feorm, -feorming f. _offence of, or penalty for, sheltering
fugitives from justice_, LL 102[30]; 2·302.

+flīeme (ē) adj. _fugitive_, DR 147^8.

flīeming (flȳmig) sb. _fugitive_, OEG 2965.

flīes (ē, ēo, ī, ȳ) n. _‘fleece,’ wool, fur, seal skin_, _LL, Ps_ (ēo).

flīet (WW 489^3) = flēot

flīetan = flītan

flīete (ē, ȳ) f. _cream, curds_: _punt_. [flēotan]

flīg = flēah I.

flīg- = flēog-, flȳg-

fligel m? n? ‘_flail_,’ A 9·264.

fliht I. m. _patch_, MkLR 2^21 (y). [flēohtan] II. = flyht

  [[I. Cross-reference unidentified.]]

flihteclāð m. _patch_, WW 206^13.

flīhð pres. 3 sg. of flēon.

flīma = flīema

flint m. _‘flint,’ rock_, _Æ, Ep, WW_.

flinten _of flint_, W 252^1.

flintgrǣg _gray like flint_, #Rd# 4^19.

flīo = flēah I.

flīs = flīes

±flit (usu. +) n. _strife_, _Ps_: _dispute, contention_: ‘_scandalum_’;
tō +flītes _emulously_. [‘_flite_’]

±flītan^1 _to strive, quarrel, dispute, contend_, _B, BH_; Æ, CP.

flitcræft m. _dialectics, logic_, OEG.

flitcræftlic _logical_.

flītend m. _contentious person_.

flītere m. _disputer, chider, quarreler, schismatic_, _Ep_. [‘_fliter_’]

±flit-ful (OEG), -fullic _contentious_.

+flitfulnes f. _litigiousness_, A 11·102^84.

±flitgeorn m. _contentious person_.

+flitgeorn _contentious_, RB 130^20.

+flitlīce _emulously_, BH 406^17.

±flitmǣlum _contentiously, emulously_.

-flitme? v. un-f.

fliusum (OET) = flēosum dp. of flēos.

flōc n. _flounder_? WW.

flōcan^7 _to clap, applaud_, #Rd# 21^34.

flocc m. _‘flock,’ company, troop_, _Æ, Chr_.

floccmǣlum _in troops_, _AO_. [‘_flockmeal_’]

flocgian _to shine forth_, GPH 399.

flocrād f. _invading band, troop_, #Chr#.

flocslite m. _sedition_, WW 116^26; A 8·451.

flōd mn. _mass of water_, _‘flood,’ wave_, _Æ, Gen, Mt, VPs_; AO, CP:
_flow (of tide as opposed to ebb)_, _tide, flux, current, stream_,
_Chr_; AO: _the flood, deluge_, _B, Lk_; Æ.

flōdblāc _pale as water_? _pale through fear of drowning_, #Ex# 497.

flōde f. _channel, gutter_, #Gl#: _flood_? (Earle), EC 120^31.

flōdegsa m. _flood terror_, #Ex# 446.

flōden _of a river_, WW 240.

flōdhamm m. _piece of land surrounded by water_? KC 1·289^16.

flōdlic _of or belonging to a stream_, #ÆGr# 54^9.

flōdweard † f. _sea-wall_.

flōdweg † m. _watery way, sea_.

flōdwudu m. _ship_, #Cr# 854.

flōdwylm † m. _flowing stream, raging billows_. [weallan]

flōdȳð f. _wave of the sea_, B 542.

flogen I. pp. of flēon. II. pp. of flēogan.

floggettan _to fly, flutter_, #Sc#; GD 100^19.

  [[Entry before author’s corrections:
  floggettan _to fluctuate_. [flēogan] ]]

flogoða m. _liquor_, GPH 402.

flōh f. _chip_, WW 416^4.

flohtenfōte _web-footed_, #Lcd# 33b.

flōr fm. ds. flōra, flōre _‘floor,’ pavement, ground_, _B, Lk_; Æ:
_bottom (of a lake, etc.)_, _Sat_.

flōrisc _flowery_, CM 44.

flōrstān m. _paving-stone, tessella_.

flot n. _deep water, sea_. on flot(e) _afloat_. [‘_float_’]

flota m. _(floater), boat, ship, vessel_: _fleet sailor_: (†) _pirate_.
[‘_float_’]

+flota m. _floater (whale)_, #Whale# 7.

floten pp. of flēotan.

floterian _to flutter, fly_, Æ: _float, be flooded, overflow_, Æ.

flothere m. _piratical fleet_, B 2915.

flotian _to ‘float,’_ _Chr_. [flēotan]

flotlic _nautical, naval_, WW 205^27.

flotmann m. _sailor, pirate_, Æ.

flotorian = floterian

flotscip n. _ship, bark_, WW.

flotsmeru n. _floating grease, fat_, LL 453[4].

flotweg m. _ocean_, #Hu# 41.

flōwan^7 _to ‘flow,’ stream, issue_, _Ps, Sol, VPs_; AO, CP: _become
liquid, melt_, _VPs_: _abound_: (+) _overflow_, AO.

flōwednes, flōwnes f. _flow, flux, overflow, torrent_, CP.

flōwende ‘_flowing_,’ _Ma_ 65.

flōwendlic _flowing_, #LPs# 147^18.

flōwing f. ‘_flowing_,’ _MtL_.

flugl- (OET 26) = fugl-

flugol _fleet, swift_: _fleeting_.

flugon I. pret. pl. of flēogan. II. pret. pl. of flēon. III. = fulgon
pret. pl. of fēolan.

fluton pret. pl. of flēotan.

flycerian = flicerian  [[under “flicorian”]]

flycge _fledged_, OEG.

flycticlāð (#Gl#) = flihteclāð

flyge (i) m. _flight_.

flȳge = flēoge

flygepīl n. _flying dart_, #Mod# 27.

flygerēow _wild in flight_, #Gu# 321.

flygul = flugol

flȳhst pres. 2 sg. of flēon.

flyht m. I. _flying, ‘flight,’_ _Æ_ (i), OET. on flyhte _on the wing_.
II. = fliht

flyhthwæt † _swift of flight_.

flȳhð pres. 3 sg. of flēon.

flȳm- = flīem-

+flȳn = +flīan

flyne (e) f. _batter_, #Lcd#.

flȳs (Æ) = flīes

flyt = flit

flȳt- = flīt-

flȳt pres. 3 sg. of flēotan.

flȳte I. m? _‘pontomium,’ boat_, WW. [cp. flēot] II. f. = flīete

flȳtme f. _fleam (blood-letting instrument)_. [_L._ phlebotomum]

flyð = flyht

±fnæd n. nap. fnadu _fringe, border, hem_, Æ.

fnǣran, fnǣrettan _to breathe heavily, snort, fume_. v. NC 356.

fnæs I. n. dp. fnasum _fringe_, WW 425^27. II. pret. 3 sg. of fnesan.
  [[error for “fnēsan”?]]

fnǣst m. _blowing, blast, breath_, _Lcd_. [‘_fnast_’]

fnǣstian _to breathe hard_, _Lcd_. [v. ‘_fnast_’]

fnēosan _to breathe hard, sneeze_.

fnēosung f. _sneezing_, _WW_. [v. ‘_fnese_’]

±fnēsan^5 _to sneeze_: _pant, gasp_.

fnora m. _sneezing_, Æ, #Gl#.

fō pres. 1 sg. of fōn.

foca m. _cake (baked on the hearth)_, ÆL 18^164.

fōda m. _‘food,’ sustenance, nourishment_, _Æ, CD_: _fuel_, _Sc_.

fodder = fōdor

foddor, foddur = fōdor

fōdor n. _‘fodder’ (for cattle), food (for man)_, _Æ, LL_: _case,
sheath_, #Gl#.

fōdorbrytta (fodder-) m. _distributor of food, herdsman_, WW 111^39.

fōdorgifu (foddur-) _food_, #PPs#.

fōdorhec (fodder-) _rack for food or fodder_, LL 455[17].

fōdornoð m. _sustenance_.

fōdorðegu † f. _partaking of food, feeding, repast, food_.

fōdorwela (foddur-) m. _wealth of food, provisions_, #Rd# 33^10.

fōdrað m. _provisions_, AO.

foe- (N) = fe-, fē-

+fōg n. _joining, joint_.

+fōgstān (fōh) m. _keystone_, CP 253^19.

fōh imperat. of fōn.

foht = feoht

fohten pp. of feohtan.

fol (wk. adj.) = full

+fol adj. _with foal_.

fol- = ful-

fola m. _‘foal,’ colt_, _Bl, Mk_; Æ.

folc n. _folk, people, nation, tribe_, _Æ, B_; AO, CP: _a collection or
class of persons, laity_, _Bl, Bo_: _troop, army_.

folcāgende † _ruling_.

folcbealo n. _great tribulation_, #Men# 125.

folcbearn † n. _man_.

folccū (folcū) f. _people’s cow_, #PPs# 67^27.

folccūð _noted_: _public_, BH.

folccwēn f. _queen of a nation_, B 641.

folccwide n. _popular saying_, NC 287.

folccyning † m. _king of a nation_.

folcdryht † f. _multitude of people_.

folcefiren † f. _public crime_.

folcegetrum = folcgetrum

folcegsa m. _general terror_, #PPs# 88^33.

folcfrēa m. _lord of the people_, #Gen# 1852.

folcfrig _having full rights of citizenship_, LL 13[8]; 344[45].

folcgedrēfnes f. _tribulation_, NC 287.

folcgefeoht n. _pitched battle_, AO.

folcgemōt n. _meeting of the people of a town or district_, _LL_.
[‘_folkmoot_’]

folcgerēfa m. _public officer_, WW.

folcgeriht = folcriht

folcgesetnes f. _statute_.

folcgesīð † m. _prince, noble_.

folcgestealla † m. _companion in war_.

folcgestrēon n. _public treasure_, #Gen# 1981.

folcgetæl n. _number of fighting men_, #Ex# 229.

folcgetrum † n. _army, host_.

folcgeðrang n. _crowd_, AO 134^26.

folcgewinn n. _fighting, war_, #Met# 1^10.

folcisc _of the people, popular, secular, common_.

folclǣsung = folclēasung

folclagu f. _law of the people, public law_.

folcland n. _land held by freemen according to tribal rules of family
inheritance_, v. LL 2·403.

folclār f. _homily_, #Gd#.

folclēasung f. _slander_, LL.

folclic _public, common, popular, plebeian, worldly, secular_, GD
209^13.

folcmægen † n. _public force, army_.

folcmǣgð † f. _tribe, nation_.

folcmǣlum = floccmǣlum

folcmǣre _celebrated_, #Gen# 1801.

folcmōt = folcgemōt

folcnēd f. _people’s need_, #PPs# 77^16.

folcrǣd † m. _public benefit_.

folcrǣden f. _decree of the people_, #Cra# 42.

folcriht I. n. _right of the people, common law_, _LL_. [‘_folkright_’]
II. adj. _according to common law_.

folcsæl n. _house_, #Rd# 2^5.

folcscearu † f. _people, nation, province_: _people’s land_, B 73
(Earle).

folcsceaða m. _villain_, #An# 1595.

folcscipe m. _nation, people_, #Rd# 33^10.

folcslite n. _sedition_, WW 111^26.

folcstede † m. _dwelling-place_: _battlefield_.

folcstōw f. _country place_, BH 160^16.

folcswēot m? _troop, multitude_, #Ex# 577.

folctalu f. _genealogy_.

folctoga † m. _chieftain, commander_.

folctruma m. _host_, #LPs#.

folcū = folccū

folcweleg _populous_, WW 476^16.

folcwer † m. _man_.

folcwiga m. _warrior_, #Rd# 15^23.

folcwita m. _public councillor, senator_, #Cra# 77.

folcwōh n. _deception of the public_, ÆL 23^691.

foldærn † n. _earth-house, grave_.

foldāgend m. _earth-possessor, earth-dweller_, #Ph# 5. (MS. folcāgend)

foldbold n. _house, castle_, B 773.

foldbūend m. _earth-dweller, man, inhabitant of a country_, CP.

folde (eo) f. _earth, ground, soil, terra firma_, _B, Jud_: _land,
country, region_: _world_.

foldgræf † n. _earth-grave_.

foldgrǣg _grey as the earth_? #GnC# 31.

foldhrērende _walking on the earth_, #Pa# 5.

foldræst f. _rest in the earth_, #Cr# 1029.

foldwæstm m. _fruits of the earth_, #Ph# 654.

foldweg † m. _way, path, road_: _earth_.

foldwela m. _earthly riches_, #Rim# 68.

foldwong † m. _plain, earth_.

folen, folgen pp. of fēolan.

folgað (AO) = folgoð

folgere m. _‘follower,’ attendant, disciple_, Æ, CP: _successor_, AO
150^27: _freeman who is not a householder_.

±folgian (often w. d.) _to ‘follow,’_ _Jn, Lk_: _accompany_, _Ps_:
_follow after_, _B_: (+) _attain_, CP 383^27: _obey, serve, oberve_,
_El_. (v. also fylgan).

folgoð m. _body of retainers, following, retinue_: _pursuit, employment,
service, dignity, office, rule_, Æ, AO, CP: _jurisdiction, district_:
_condition of life, destiny_.

folm †, folme f. _palm, hand_. [fēlan]

fon = fann

fōn^7 (±) _to take, grasp, seize, catch_, _B, BH, Gen_; CP, Æ: _capture,
make prisoner_, _Chr_: _receive, accept, assume, undertake_, _B, Sol_;
CP: _meet with, encounter_. f. on _take up, begin, resume_, Æ: _take
to_, _Æ, Bo_. f. tō rīce _ascend the throne_, Æ, AO. f. tōgædre _join
together, join issue, engage in battle_. him tōgēanes feng _clutched at
him_, B. him on fultum feng _helped them_, #Jud# 300. hlyst +f.
_listen_. [‘_fang_,’ ‘_i-fang_’]

fond = fand pret. 3 sg. of findan.

fong- = fang-

fonn = fann

font == fant

fonu = fanu

for I. prep. (with d., inst. and a.) (local) _before, in the sight of,
in or into the presence of_, _B, Gen_: _as far as_, IM 119^13:
(temporal) _during, before_: (causal) _‘for,’ on account of, for the
sake of, through, because of, owing to, from, by reason of_, _Æ, B, Gen,
Met_. for worulde _as regards this world_, Æ. for Dryhtne _by God_: _in
order to_: _in place of, instead of, equivalent to, at the price of_,
_Æ, Gu, Mt_: _in preference to_, _Rood_: _in spite of_, _Chr_. II. conj.
_for, because_. for hwȳ, for hwām, for hwon _wherefore_? for ðām, for
ðon, for ðȳ _therefore, because, since_. for ðām ðe (ðȳ), for ðȳ ðe
_because_. for ðȳ ðæt, for ðām ðæt _in order that_. III. adv. _too,
very_, Æ. for ān _only_.

for- I. denotes loss or destruction (as in fordōn, forgiefan), or is
intensitive or pejorative, as in forbærnan, forrotian. It is not
connected with the preposition ‘for.’ Its original form was fer- [cp.
_Ger._ ver-]. II. occly = fore-

fōr I. f. _going, course, journey, expedition_, _BH_; AO: _way, manner
of life_. [faran] II. m. _pig, hog_, OEG. III. pret. 3 sg. of faran.

fora (N) = foran

fora- = fore-

forad = forod

foran I. prep. (w. d.) _before, opposite_. II. adv. _before, in front,
forward_, _Rd_; Æ, AO, CP: _to the front_, _Da_. foran ongean
_opposite_. [‘_forne_’]

foranbodig n. _thorax, chest_, WW 158^41.

forandæg _early part of the day_? Æ (NC), _first day_? (BT).

forane = foran II.

foranhēafod n. _forehead_, Æ.

foranniht f. _early part of the night, dusk, evening_, Æ.

forantō prep. (w. d.) _before_.

forāð = foreāð

forbærnan _to cause to burn, burn up, consume by fire, be consumed_, _Æ,
Chr_; AO. [‘_forburn_’]

forbærnednes f. _burning up_, #Lcd#.

forbearan = forberan

forbearnan = forbærnan

fōrbed n. _portable bed, litter_, ZDA 31.

forbēgan = forbīgan

forbelgan^3 _to be enraged_, #Bl#.

forbēn f. _prayer_, DHy 138^13.

forbēodan^2 _to ‘forbid,’ prohibit_, _Chr, G_; Æ: _restrain_, _Ps_:
_refuse_, _Lk_: _repeal, annul_, LL 42[49].

forbēodendlic _dehortative, dissuasive_, #ÆGr# 225^11.

forbeornan^3 (e, y) _to burn, be consumed by fire_, AO.

forberan I. (sv^4) _to ‘forbear,’ abstain from, refrain_, CP: _suffer,
endure, tolerate, humour_, _CP, B, BH_: _restrain_. II. = foreberan

forbernan = forbeornan

forberstan^3 _to break, burst asunder, vanish, fail_, _LL_: _let go by
default_, EC 201´. [‘_forburst_’]

forbētan = forebētan

forbīgan (ē, ȳ) _to bend down, bow down, depreciate, abase, humiliate,
degrade_.

forbīgels m. _arch, arched roof_, WW 126^3.

forbindan^3 _to bind (up)_, _muzzle_, _CP_ 105^7. [‘_forbind_’]

forbisen = forebysen

forbītan^1 _to bite through_, HL 18^391.

forblāwan^7 _to blow_, _AO_: _blow out, inflate_, _Lcd_. [‘_forblow_’]

forblindian _to blind_, MkR 6^52.

fōrbōc f. _itinerary_, OEG 2023.

forbod n. _prohibition_, _LL_; CP. [‘_forbode_’]

forboda = foreboda

forbrecan^5 (æ^2) _to break in pieces, bruise, violate, crush, destroy_,
_Jn_; AO, CP. forbrocen _broken down, decrepit_. [‘_forbreak_’]

for-brēdan^3, -bregdan _to tear in pieces_: _draw over, cover_: _change,
transform_, _Bo_. [‘_forbraid_’]

for-britan, -brittan = forbryttan

forbryt-ednes (#ESPs#), -ennes (#V^2Ps#) f. _contrition_.

forbrytian = forbryttan

forbryttan _to break in pieces, crush, bruise_.

forbūgan^2 _to bend from, refrain from, avoid, decline_, _Æ, Ma_; CP:
_flee from, escape_, CP: _hold down_. [‘_forbow_’]

forbȳgan = forbīgan

forbyrd f. _abstention_, AO 30^25.

forbyrdian _to wait for_, #EPs# 32^20.

forbyrdig _forbearing_, NC 287.

forbyrnan (Æ) = forbeornan

force f. ‘_fork_,’ _Æ, WW_.

forcēap _forestalling (in trade)_, LL 234[2,10]. [= *forecēap]

forceorfan^3 _to carve out, cut down, cut off, cut through, divide_, _Æ,
Chr_; AO, CP. [‘_forcarve_’]

forcēwan^2 _to bite off_, #Bo# 36^23.

for-cierran (CP) -cerran _to turn aside, prevent, avert, avoid_, CP:
_turn oneself away, escape_.

forcierrednes (y^2) f. _perversity_, GD 119^15: _turning aside_, #BPs#
125^1.

forcierring (e, y) f. _turning aside_, #CVPs# 125^1.

forcinnan _to deny, disown_? #Sol# 107.

forcippian (y) _to cut off_, RHy 2^12. [cp. _Eng._ chip]

forclǣman _to stop up_, #Gl#.

forclas mp. _prongs_? NC 287.

forclingan^3 _to wither, shrink up_, _Cp_. [‘_forcling_’]

forclyccan _to stop, close (ears)_, #RPs# 57^5.

forclȳsan _to close up_, #Lcd# 3·92^22.

forcnīdan = forgnīdan

forcuman^4 _to come before, prevent, surprise_: _harass, wear out,
destroy_: _overcome, conquer, obtain_: _surpass_.

forcunnian _to tempt_: _understand_.

for-cūð (Æ) _bad, wicked, infamous, foul, despicable_, _Æ, Bo_; AO, CP.
adv. -cūðe. [‘_forcouth_’]

forcūðlic = forcūð

forcūðlīce = forcūðe  [[form of “forcūð”]]

forcweðan^5 _to speak ill of, abuse, revile_, CP: _reprove_: _refuse,
reject_, CP: _boast, promise great things_, #GnE# 49.

forcwolstan^3? _to swallow_, #Lcd# 18a.

forcwȳsan _to shake violently_, #SPs# 109^7.

forcyppian = forcippian

forcyrran (Æ) = forcierran

forcȳðan _to surpass in knowledge_: _understand_: _argue, urge_.

ford m. ds. forda ‘_ford_,’ _Æ, AO_; Mdf.

fordǣlan _to spend_.

fordēad _dead_, MtL 28^4.

fordelfan^3 _to delve, dig_, EC 120^28.

fordēman _to condemn, sentence, doom_, _Mt_; Æ: _prejudice_, EC 145:
_decide_, #Sc# 125^5. [‘_fordeem_’]

fordēmedlic _to be condemned_, GD 208^9.

fordēmednes f. _condemnation, proscription_, BH 34^5, GD 345^3.

fordēmend m. _accuser_, JnL p5^9.

fordēmian = fordēman

fordēming f. _plunder, spoliation_, OEG 3149.

fordemman _to dam up, block up_, #EPs# 57^5.

fordettan (#KGl#) = fordyttan

fordīcigan _to shut out by a ditch, block up_, CP.

for-dilgian, -dilegian, -diligian _to blot out, destroy, abolish_, _BH_.
[‘_fordilghe_’]

fordimmian _to obscure, darken_, _Sc_. [‘_fordim_’]

fordittan = fordyttan

fordōn anv. _to undo, bring to nought, ruin, destroy_, _BH_; AO, Æ:
_abolish_, _Chr_: _kill_, Æ, AO: _corrupt, seduce, defile_. pp. fordōn
_corrupt, wicked, abandoned_. [‘_fordo_’]

fordrǣfan _to drive, compel_, LL 24[62].

fordrencan (æ) _to make drunk, intoxicate_, _Æ_. [‘_fordrench_’] pp.
fordruncen _drunk_, _CP_. [‘_fordrunken_’]

fordrīfan^1 _to drive, sweep away_: _drive on, impel, compel_, AO:
_drive away, expel_, Æ. [_Ger._ vertreiben]

fordrifnes f. _objection, opposition_, NG.

fordrincan^3 _to make drunk, be drunk_, CP.

fordrūgian _to become dry, wither_, _Met_. [‘_fordry_’]

fordrūwian = fordrūgian

forduttan (#VPs#) = fordyttan

fordwilman _to confound_, #Bo# 14^5.

fordwīnan^1 _to vanish_, _Æ_. [‘_fordwine_’]

fordyslic _very foolish_, #Bo# 42^10.

fordyttan (e, i, u) _to obstruct, block up, close_, _Cp_; Æ.
[‘_fordit_’]

fore I. prep. w. d. a. (local) _before, in the sight of, in presence
of_, _B_: (causal) _because of, for the sake of, through, on account of,
by reason of, from_, _BH_: (temporal) _before_, _Cr_: _for, instead of_.
II. adv. _before, beforehand, formerly, once_, _Ps_. [‘_fore_’]

fore- occly. = for-

foreald (y^2) _very old_, RB 114^11.

forealdian _to grow old, decay_, _BH_; Æ, CP. [‘_forold_’]

foreāstreccan _to lay low, overthrow_, #EPs# 105^26.

foreāð m. _preliminary oath_, _LL_ (v. 2·546). [‘_foreoath_’]

forēaðe _very easily_, Æ.

fore-bēacen, -bēacn (Æ), -bēcen n. _sign, portent, prodigy_.

forebegān _to intercept_, #Chr# 1009#e#.

foreberan _to prefer_, BH 294^7.

forebētan _to make legal amends (vicariously)_, LL.

forebirig = forebyrig, ds. of foreburh.

forebiscop m. _high priest_, MtL 1^18 (mg).

forebisegian _to preoccupy_, OEG 1236.

foreblǣsting (ē) f. _shoot, branch_, #EPs# 79^12.

fōrebōc (#HGl# 454) = fōrbōc

forebod n. _prophecy, preaching_, NG.

foreboda m. _forerunner, messenger_, ANS 84^14.

forebodian _to announce, declare_.

forebodung f. _prophecy_, NG.

forebrǣdan _to prolong_, #EPs# 119^5: _overshadow_, MkL 9^7.

forebrēost n. _chest_, WW.

foreburh f. _outwork_: _outer court, vestibule_, Æ.

forebyrd f. _longsuffering_, CP 41^17.

forebysen f. _example_.

foreceorfan^3 ‘_præcidere_,’ #ÆGr# 172^4.

foreceorfend m. _front tooth_, WW 264^11.

forecēosan _to chose in preference_, #BCJRPs# 131^13,14.

foreclipian (y) ‘_proclamare_,’ BHy 3^4; ANS 122·265.

forecnēowrisn _progeny_, #EPs#.

forecostigan _to profane_, #EPs# 88^32.

forecostung f. _profanation_, #EPs# 88^35.

forecuman^4 _to come before, prevent_, _BH_: _overcome_? _Ps_: _come
out, come upon_, NG. [‘_forecome_’]

forecweðan^5 _to preach, predict_.

forecweden _aforesaid_, GD 12; 344.

forecwide m. _prophecy_: _introduction, heading (of chapter)_, NG.

forecyme m. _proceeding forth_, MtL p4^3.

fore-cynren, -cynrēd n. _progeny_.

forecȳðan _to make known to_, TC 300^24: ‘_pronuntiare_,’ #EPs# 70^15.

fored = forod

fore-dyre, -dere n. _vestibule_, OEG (T. 135).

foredyrstig? ‘_presumptuosus_,’ LL 409[22].

forefæger _very fair_, ES 8·479^89.

fore-feng, fong = forfang

forefēran _to go before_.

forefex n. _forelock_, OEG 5326; 2^453.

forefōn^7 _to prevent, anticipate_.

foregān anv., foregangan^7 _to go before, precede_, _BH, VPs_: _go in
front of, project_: _excel_. [‘_forego_’]

forege- = for(e)-

foregearwung f. _preparation, parasceve_.

foregebiddan^5 _to intercede_, RB 62^8.

foregehāt n. _vow_, ÆL 23b^543.

foregehātan _to promise_: _invite_, NG.

foregenga m. _forerunner_: _predecessor, ancestor_, CP: _attendant_,
#Jud# 127.

foregengel (for-) m. _predecessor_, #Chr# 963#e#.

foregescēaw- = forescēaw-

foregesecgan _to predestine_, MtL p1^9.

foregesettan = foresettan

foregeswuteliende ‘_indagande_,’ OEG 1504.

foregetēon^2 _to point out_, #HGl# 411.

foregeðingian = foreðingian

foregidd n. _proverb_, JnR 16^29.

foregielpan^3 _to vaunt_, AO.

foregīsl m. _preliminary hostage_ (Swt); _foremost hostage_ (BT),
#Chr# 878.

foreglēaw _foreseeing, provident, wise, prudent_, Æ. adv. -līce.

foregyrnan _to show before_, #Sc# 203^17.

forehālig _very holy_, ANS 84·3.

forehūs n. _porch_, LV 33.

forehȳran _to hear of_, #Bl#.

foreiernend m. _forerunner_, WW 339^6.

forelād-tēow, -twa m. _precursor_, LkLR 22^26.

forelǣdan _to lead forth_, MtL 15^14.

forelǣrend m. _teacher_, #Bl# 149^13.

forelār f. _preaching_, MtL p16^5.

forelcian _to delay_, NC 288.

foreldan = forieldan

forelegnis = forlegis

forelēoran _to go before, pass by_, NG.

forelēornes f. _‘prævaricatio,’ transgression_, #EPs# 100^3
(cp. ofer-l.).

forelocc m. ‘_forelock_,’ _OEG_.

forelōcian ‘_prospicere, respicere, aspicere_,’ #EPs#.

foremǣre _illustrious, renowned, famous_, Æ.

foremǣrlic _eminent_, #Bo# 75^24.

foremǣrnes f. _eminence, fame_, #Bo#.

foremanian _to forewarn_, BH 412^30.

foremanig _very many_, MtL p18^12.

foremeahtig = foremihtig

foremearcod _before-mentioned_, CM 378.

foremearcung (e^2) f. _title, chapter_, NG.

foremihtig (ea) _very strong, most mighty_. adv. -līce.

fōremunt m. _promontory_, WW 464^17.

forene = forane

forenyme m. _taking before_, #Gl#.

forerīm m. _prologue_.

forerynel m. _forerunner, herald, morning star_, Æ, CP.

foresacan^6 _to forbid_, MtL 3^14.

foresǣd _aforesaid_, _Æ_. [‘_foresaid_’]

fore-sægdnes, -saga f. _preface_, NG.

foresændan = foresendan

forescēawere (for-) m. ‘_provisor_,’ ES 39·327.

forescēawian _to ‘foreshow,’ foresee_, Æ: _pre-ordain, decree, appoint_,
Æ: _provide, furnish with_, _Æ_.

forescēawodlīce _with forethought, thoughtfully_, CM 76.

forescēawung f. _contemplation, foresight, providence_, _Sc_; Æ.
[‘_foreshowing_’]

forescēotan^2 (for-) _to anticipate, forestall_, #Bo# 124^11.

forescieldnes f. ‘_protectio_,’ #EPs# 120^5.

forescyttels m. _bolt, bar_, #Cr# 312.

foresēcan _to appeal (for justice)_, LL 152[3] and nn.

foresecgan _to mention before_, Æ: _foretell_, _BH_; Æ.

foreseld n. _first seat_, MtL 23^6.

foresellan _to spend, advance (money)_.

foresendan _to send before_.

foresēon^5 _to ‘foresee,’_ _Ps_: _provide_, BH: _provide for_, BH.

foresēond m. _provider_, BH 338^10.

foresēones _foresight, providence_, BH.

fore-setnes, -setenes f. _proposition, purpose_: _preposition_, #ÆGr#.

foresettan _to place before, shut in_, _VPs_: _propose_: _prefer_:
_precede_. [‘_foreset_’]

foresingend m. _precentor_, WW 129^21.

foresittan^5 _to preside over_, BH.

fore-smēagan, -smēan _to think beforehand_.

foresnotor _very wise_, B 3163.

forespǣc = foresprǣc

forespeca = forespreca

fore-sprǣc (CP), -sprēc, -spǣc (WW) f. _advocacy, defence, excuse_:
_agreement, arrangement_: _preamble, preface, prologue_, Æ, CP:
_promise_. [‘_forespeech_’]

forespreca m. _intercessor, advocate, mediator_: _sponsor_, LL 442[I].

foresprecan^5 _to speak or answer for, be surety for, intercede for_,
CP: _say before_. foresprecen _above-mentioned, aforesaid_, _Bo_: =
forspecan. [‘_forespoken_’]

forestæppan (Æ) = foresteppan

forestæppend m. _precursor_, Lk 22^26.

forestæppung f. _anticipation_, A 8·331.

forestandan^6 _to preside, lead_: _excel_, WW 464^15.

forestapul _going before_, GPH 196.

foresteall (for-) m. _intervention, hindrance (of justice)_: _ambush,
assault, offence of waylaying on the highway_, _Æ, LL_: _fine for such
an offence_: _resistance, opposition_. [‘_forestall_’]

forestemman _to prevent, hinder_, NG.

forestēora m. _look-out man, pilot_, WW 464^8.

foresteppan^6 (æ) _to precede, go before_, Æ: _excel_: _forestall,
prevent_.

forestigan^1 _to excel_, #ÆGr# 154^11n.

forestige m. _vestibule_, OEG 4688 and n.

forestihtian _to fore~ordain_, Æ.

forestihtung f. _predestination_, Æ.

foreswerian^6 _to swear before_, Æ.

foretācn n. _‘fore-token,’ prognostic, prodigy, sign, wonder_, _Bo_; CP.

foretācnian _to foreshow_, BH 216^17.

foreteohhung f. _predestination_, #Bo#.

foretēon _to fore-ordain, frame beforehand, arrange_.

foretēð mp. _front teeth_, _WW_. [‘_foretooth_’]

foretīg m. _forecourt, porch_, Mt 11^16.

foretȳnd _shut in_, BH 386^2.

foreðanc m. _forethought, providence, consideration, deliberation_, CP.

foreðanclic _thoughtful, careful, prudent_, CP. adv. -līce.

foreðancol _provident, prudent, considerate_, CP.

foreðancolnes f. _prudence_, #PPs# 48^3.

foreðencan _to premeditate, consider, be mindful_, CP. [‘_forethink_’]

foreðingere m. _intercessor, mediator_, Æ.

foreðingian _to plead for any one, intercede, defend_.

foreðingiend m. _intercessor_.

fore-ðingrǣden, -ðingung f. _intercession_, Æ.

foreðonc == foreðanc

forewall = foreweall

foreward = foreweard

forewarnian _to take warning beforehand_.

foreweall m. _rampart, bulwark_, _Ex_. [‘_forewall_’]

foreweard (a^2, e^2) I. f. _condition, bargain, agreement, treaty,
assurance_. II. m. _outpost, scout_. III. adj. _‘forward,’ inclined to
the front_, _Æ, BH_: _fore, early, former_, Æ. f. gēar _new year_. IV.
adv. (-wearde at AS 55^4) _in front_, CP: _towards the future_, _Gen_.
fram foreweardum _once more_, RB.

foreweorðan^3 _to predestinate_, MkL p1^20.

fore-wesan anv. pret. 3 sg. -wæs _to be over, rule over_, BH.

forewīs _foreknowing_, HL 18^363.

forewitan swv. _to foreknow_, _Bo_. [‘_forewit_’]

forewītegian _to prophesy_, Æ.

forewītegung f. _prophecy_, OEG.

forewitig _foreknowing_, Æ.

forewitol _foreknowing_, #Chr# 1067#d#.

forewittlendlic _prescient_, OEG 1502.

forewitung f. _foreknowing, presage_.

foreword = foreweard

forewost (e^3) m. _chief, captain_, NG.

forewrēgan = forwrēgan

forewrītan^1 _to proscribe, banish_. forewriten _above or
before-written_, CM 276^540.

forewritennes f. _proscription, exile_, WW 466^5.

forewyrcend m. _servant_, ÆL 3^156.

forewyrd f. _predestination_, #Gl#.

forfang (forefeng) m. _capture_, _(legal) seizure, recovery of cattle or
other property_, _LL_: _reward for rescuing properly_, _LL_ (v. 388-391
and 2·279). [‘_forfang_’]

forfangfeoh n. _reward for rescuing cattle or other property_. [LL 390,
3, 2]

forfaran^6 _to pass away, perish_, #Chr#: _lose, destroy, ruin_:
_intercept, obstruct_.

forfeng I. pret. 3 sg. of forfōn. II. = forfang

forfēran (Æ) = forðfēran

forferian _to let die_, LL 58[17].

forflēon^2 _to flee from, escape, avoid, evade_, Æ.

forflȳgan _to put to flight_, ZDA 31·16^418.

forfōn^7 _to seize_: _anticipate, forestall_: _surprise_: _prevent_:
_forfeit_.

forfyllan _to stop up, obstruct_, WW 463^10.

forg- = foreg-

forgǣgan _to transgress, trespass, prevaricate_, Æ: _pass by, omit,
neglect_, OEG, W.

forgǣgednes f. _transgression, trespass_, Æ.

forgǣgung f. _fault, excess_, #Sc# 115^9.

forgǣlan _to avoid_, LkL.

forgān I. anv. _to go or pass over, by or away_, _Æ, MtL_: _‘forgo,’
abstain from, neglect, lose_, _Æ_; CP, Æ. II. = foregān

forgedōn = fordōn

forgeearnung f. _merit_, DHy 132^1.

forgefenes = forgiefnes

forgēgan = forgǣgan

forgeldan = forgieldan

forgēm- = forgīm-, forgīem-

forgeorne _very earnestly, very attentively_, #Bl#.

forget = forgiet pres. 3 sg. of forgietan.

forgiefan^5 (i, y) _to give, grant, allow_; _BH, Bl_; CP: _‘forgive,’
overlook_, _Gen, Lk, Mt_; AO, CP: _give up, leave off_, CP: _give in
marriage_.

forgiefnes (i, y) f. _pardon_, _‘forgiveness,’ remission_, _Bl_; CP:
_indulgence, permission_, _BH_ (i): _gift_? #Cr# 425.

forgieldan^3 (e, i, y) _to pay for_, CP: _requite, reward_, _Bl_; AO,
CP: _indemnify, make good_: _pay double (as penalty)_, LL: _give_.
[‘_foryield_’]

forgielpan^3 _to boast in public, trumpet forth_, W 234^16.

forgīemelēasian (ī, ȳ) _to neglect, abandon, give up, omit_, CP.

forgietan^5 (i, y) w. a. or g. _to ‘forget,’_ _B, Ma, Ps_; AO, CP. For
comps. v. forgit-.

forgif- = forgief-

for-gifenlic, -gifendlic _that may be forgiven_, _Mt_: _dative_, #ÆGr#
22^16 (y^2). [‘_forgivelich_’]

forgifestre f. _female giver_, DHy 49^6.

forgifu f. ‘_gratia_,’ DHy 78^7.

forgifung f. _gift_.

forgildan = forgieldan

forgīman (ē, ȳ) _to neglect, pass by, transgress_, _B_ (ē).
[‘_foryeme_’]

forgīmelēasian = forgīemelēasian

forgitan = forgietan

forgitel (eo^2, y^2, o^3, u^3) _forgetful_, _Æ_. [‘_forgetel_’]

forgitelnes (y^2) f. _forgetfulness, oblivion_, _LPs_.

forgiten pp. _forgetting_: _forgetful_.

forgiting f. _forgetfulness_, CM 1065.

forglendr-an, -ian _to devour, swallow up_, W.

forgnagan^6 _to eat up_, _Æ_. [‘_forgnaw_’]

forgnīdan^1 _to grind together, dash down, crush, break_, _LPs_.
[‘_forgnide_’]

forgniden _contrite_.

forgnidennes f. _tribulation_, #LPs# 13^3; #APs# 146^3.

forgnȳdan = forgnīdan

forgrindan^3 _to grind down, ruin, destroy, consume_.

forgrindet n. _grinding, pounding_, Cp 776#c#.

forgrīpan^1 _to seize, assail, attack, overwhelm_.

forgrōwen _grown up_? _overgrown_? _Rim_ 46. [v. ‘_forgrow_’]

forgumian (LL 474, 2) = forgīman

forgyf- = forgief-, forgif-

forgyldan = forgieldan

forgyltan _to sin, be or become guilty_, W. forgylt _condemned, guilty_.

forgȳm- = forgīm-, forgīem-

forgyrd = forðgyrd

forgyrdan _to enclose, encircle_.

forgyt- = forgiet-, forgit-

for-habban, pret. 3 sg. -hæfde _to hold in, restrain, retain, keep
back_: _draw back, refrain from, avoid_, Æ. forhæfed _continent,
abstemious_.

forhæbbenda m. _abstinent, continent person_, CP.

forhǣfd = forhēafod

forhæf(e)dnes f. _temperance, continence, self-restraint, abstinence_,
_BH_; Æ, CP: _parsimony_. [‘_forhevedness_’]

forhǣðed _burnt up_.

forhātan^7 _to renounce, forswear_, _Æ_. [‘_forhight_’] se forhātena
_the devil_, _Gen_ 609.

forhēafdnes (AS 22^16) = forhǣfednes  [[headword spelled “forhæfednes”]]

forhēafod n. _‘forehead,’ brow, skull_, _WW_; Æ. [= fore-]

forhealdan^7 _to forsake, fall away from, rebel against_, _B_: _defile,
pollute_, #Bl#: _keep back, withhold_, LL 130, 6, 1: _misuse, abuse_.
[‘_forhold_’]

forhealdnes f. _unchastity_, NC 288.

forheard _very hard_, #Ma# 156.

forheardian _to grow hard_, #LVPs# 89^6.

forhēawan^7 _to hew in pieces, cut down, kill_, _Ma_. [‘_forhew_’]

forhefednes = forhæfednes

forhegan (#KGl#) = forhogian

forhelan^4 _to cover over, conceal, hide, protect_, _Æ, Bo_; CP.
sacne f. _conceal a guilty man_. [‘_forhele_’]

for-hellan? -hellian _to hide_, OEG 5410n.

forhergend m. _ravager_, #Gl#.

for-hergian, -herigean, -heregian _to plunder, harry, ravage, devastate,
destroy_, AO, CP. [_Ger._ verheeren]

for-hergung, -her(g)iung f. _harassing, devastation_, AO 74^36.

forhicgan = forhycgan

forhīenan _to cast down, defeat, humiliate, humble, outrage, oppress,
waste_, AO. [_Ger._ verhöhnen]

forhigan = forhycgan

for-hoged-, -hogd- = forhogod-

forhogian _to neglect, disregard, despise_, _BH_; Æ, CP. [‘_forhow_’]

forhogiend m. _despiser_.

forhogodlic _contemptuous_, #Bl# 77^23. adv. -līce.

forhogodnes f. _contempt_.

forhogung f. _contempt_, #BPs#, CM.

forhohnes = forhogodnes

forhradian _to hasten before, prevent, anticipate, frustrate_, Æ, CP.

forhraðe _very speedily, quickly, soon_, Æ.

forhrēred _annulled_, WW.

forht _afraid, timid, cowardly_, AO, CP: _frightful, terrible_. adv.
forhte _despairingly_.

forhtful _fainthearted, timorous_.

±forhtian (tr. and intr.) _to be afraid, surprised, fear, dread_, Æ.

forhtiendlic _timorous_, WW 442^5.

forhtige _humbly, submissively_, RB 70^5.

forhtigend _timid_, W: _dreadful_, W.

forhtlic _fearful, afraid_. adv. -līce.

forhtmōd _timorous, timid_, Æ.

forhtnes f. _fear, terror_, Æ.

forhtung f. _fear_, Æ.

forhugian = forhogian

forhwæn, forhwan = forhwon

forhweorfan^3 _to come to an end, be destroyed_.

forhwerfan = forhwierfan

for-hwī, -hwig = forhwȳ

forhwierfan (e, eo, i, y) _to change, transform_: _remove, transfer_:
_pervert_, CP.

forhwon _wherefore, why, for what reason_.

forhwȳ (ī^2) _why, wherefore_, _Ps_. [‘_forwhy_’]

forhwyrfan = forhwierfan

forhwyrfedlic _perverse_, #Bl# 31^4.

forhwyrfednes f. _perversity_, NC 288.

forhycgan _to disdain, despise, reject_, CP.

forhȳdan _to hide_, _Ps_; CP. [‘_forhide_’]

forhygdelic _despised_, #LPs# 118^141.

forhylman _to refuse obedience to_, #An# 735.

forhȳnan = forhīenan

forhyrdan (i) _to harden_, #EPPs# 94^8. [heard]

forieldan _to put off, delay_, CP.

foriernan^3 _to run before, outrun_, _Jn_ 20^4 (fore- _JnL_).
[‘_forerun_’]

forinlīce _thoroughly, exceedingly_, #Bo# 94^6.

forinweardlīce _thoroughly, genuinely_, #Bo# 137^15.

forlācan^7 † _to mislead, seduce, deceive, betray_.

forlǣdan _to mislead, seduce_, Æ, AO, CP: _bring out_ (= forð-), Æ.
[_Ger._ verleiten]

forlǣran _to teach wrongly, lead astray, seduce, pervert_, _An_; Æ.
[‘_forlere_’]

forlǣtan^7 _to let go, relinquish, surrender, lose, leave, abandon,
neglect_, _An, Bl_; Æ, CP: _remit, pardon, excuse_: _loose, release_:
_let, permit, allow_, _BH_: _grant, give_. ūp, in f. _to direct upwards,
within_. ān(n)e f. = ān- forlǣtan. [‘_forlet_’]

forlætednes (GD 227^16) = forlætennes
  [[headword spelled “forlǣtennes”]]

for-lǣtennes (Æ), -lǣtnes, -lǣting f. _leaving, departure, absence_:
_loss, perdition_: _intermission, cessation, end_: _remission_.

forlǣting f. _intermission_.

forlegenes = forlegnes

forlegenlic _mean-looking, ugly_.

forlegere = forligere

for-legis, -leges f. _prostitute, adulteress_, CP.

for-legis-, -legor- = forliger-

forlegnes f. _fornication_.

forlēogan^2 _to lie, perjure oneself, slander_, Æ.

forlēoran (#EPs# 143^14) = forelēoran

forleornung f. _deception_, #Bl# 183^34.

forleorte redupl. pret. sg. of forlǣtan.

forlēosan^2 _to lose, abandon, let go_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP: _destroy, ruin_,
_Gen_. forloren _ruined_. [‘_forlese_’]

forlēt- = forlǣt-

forlettan (fore-) _to prevent_, MkL 10^14.

forlicgan^5 _to commit adultery or fornication_, _AO_; CP: _fail,
lapse_, LL 178[7]: _screen (a thief)_, LL 274[12]. [‘_forlie_’] pp.
forlegen used as sb. _adulterer, fornicator_.

forlicgend m. _fornicator_.

forlīden pp. of forlīðan.

forlidennes = forliðennes

forligan = forlicgan

for-ligenes, -lignes = forlegnes

forliger I. n. _adultery, fornication, wantonness, immorality_, Æ. II.
m. _whoremonger, adulterer_, Æ: _fornicatress_? III. adj. _adulterous_.

forligerbed n. _bed of fornication_.

forligere = forliger I.

forligeren adj. _fornicating_, OEG 8^232.

forligerhūs n. _house of ill fame_, OEG.

forligerlic _unchaste, impure_, OEG.

forligerwīf (-ego) n. _prostitute_, MH 140^19.

forliges = forlegis

forliggang m. _house of ill-fame_? _fornication_? WW 499^12.

forligrian _to commit fornication_, #ERSPs# 72^26.

forlīr = forliger II.

forlīðan^1 _to suffer shipwreck_.

forliðennes f. _shipwreck_, OEG.

for-long, -longe adv. _long ago_, NG.

forlor m. _loss, destruction_, AO, CP. tō forlore gedōn _to
destroy_, CP.

forlorenes f. _state of being forlorn, perdition, destruction_, _VPs_.
[‘_forlornness_’]

for-lorian, -losian _to lose_, NG.

forlustlīce _very willingly_, #Bo# 51^18.

forlytel _very little_, #Bo#.

form = feorm

form- (NG) = frum-

forma (eo) _first, earliest_, _Bo_; CP. [‘_forme_’] on forman _at
first_.

for-mǣl, -māl f? n? _negotiation, agreement, treaty_, LL. [mǣl II.]

formǣrnes = foremǣrnes

formanig _very many_.

formelle f. _bench_, ANS 84·9. [_L._ formella]

formeltan^3 (y) _to melt away, dissolve, liquefy, burn up_, _AO_; Æ.
[‘_formelt_’]

formesta = fyrmesta wk. superl. of forma.

fōrmete m. _food for a journey_.

formicel (y^2) _very great_, LL 302[20,2].

formogod _corrupted_, ÆL 23^375.

formolsnian _to rot away, crumble, decay_, Æ.

formolsnung f. _corruption_, OEG 1251.

formycel = formicel

formyltan = formeltan

formyrðrian _to murder_, LL, W.

forn = foran

fōrn f? m? _trout_, WW 180^39.

fornǣman _to be worn out, afflicted (with grief)_, GD 245^3.

forne = foran adv.

fōrne f. = fōrn

fornēah _very nearly, well-nigh, almost, about_, Æ, AO, CP.

for-nēan (Æ), -nēh, -nēon = fornēah

Fornētes folm _a plant_, #Lcd# (v. BT).

fornēðan _to expose to danger, sacrifice_, AO 222^1.

forniman^4 _to take away, deprive of, plunder, waste, devastate,
destroy, consume_, _B, Lcd_; Æ, AO: _annul_: _disfigure_: _overcome_.
[‘_fornim_’]

fornȳdan _to coerce, compel_, W 158^10.

fornyman = forniman

fornyrwan _to oppress_, ANS 128·57.

fornytlic _very useful_, GD 174^20.

forod _broken down, worn out, useless, void, abortive_, Æ, AO, CP.

foroft _very often_.

forpǣran _to turn away, lose, spoil, pervert, destroy_, Æ, CP.

forpyndan † _to do away, remove_.

fōrracu f. _itinerary_, OEG 7^121.

forradian = forhradian

forrǣda? m. _traitor, plotter_, MP 1·592.

forrǣdan _to plot against, betray_, _W_: _condemn_: _injure_.
[‘_forrede_’]

forraðe _very soon_, Æ.

forrepen _taken_, JnL p5^8.

forrīdan^1 _to intercept by riding before_, #Chr# 894#a#.

forrīdel m. _fore-rider, forerunner, messenger_, _Æ_. [‘_forridel_’]

forrotednes (a^3, o^3) f. _corrupt matter, rottenness_, Æ.

forrotian _to rot away, decay_, _CP, WW_; Æ. [‘_forrot_’]

forrynel = forerynel

forsacan^6 _to object to, reject, oppose, deny, refuse_, _AO, Cp, LL_:
_give up, renounce_, AO, CP. [‘_forsake_’]

forsacennes f. _denial_, A 11·386^383.

forsacung f. _denial_, NC 288.

forsǣcan = forsēcan

forsǣtian _to lay wait for, beset, surround_, AO 146^10.

forsǣtnian (ē) _to hedge in, beset_, #ERPs# 21^17.

forsæwestre = forsewestre

forsawen = forsewen

forsc m. ‘_frog_,’ _Æ_ (frox); #Gl#.

forscād- = forscēad-

forscæncednes (#LPs# 40^10) = forscrencednes

forscamian _to be ashamed_ (impers. w. a.), _CP_. [‘_forshame_’]

forscamung f. _modesty_, GPH 390.

forscapung (AO) = forsceapung

forscēadan^7 _to scatter, disperse_, CP: _damn, condemn_? #Gu# 449 (GK).

forsceamian = forscamian

forsceap n. _evil deed_? #Gen# 898.

forsceapung f. _misdeed, crime, fault_.

forscēaw- = forescēaw-

forscending f. _confusion_, LkR 21^25.

forsceorfan^3 _to gnaw off, bite, eat up_, AO 226^9.

forscēotan = forescēotan

forsceppan = forscieppan

forsceta _waterfall_, OET 575; MF 434.

forscieppan^6 _to change, transform_, _Gen_. [‘_forshape_’]

forscip n. _‘foreship,’ prow_, _WW_.

forscræncan = forscrencan

forscrencan _to supplant, overcome, vanquish, cast down_, Æ: _dry up_,
OEG 4926.

forscrencednes (scænc-) f. _supplanting, deceit_, #LPs# 40^10.

forscrencend m. _supplanter_, Æ.

forscrīfan^1 _to decree_, #Gl#: _proscribe, condemn, doom_, Æ: (†)
_bewitch, cast under a spell_.

forscrincan^3 (intr.) _to shrink, dry up, wither away_, _Æ_.
[‘_forshrink_’]

forscūfan^2 _to cast down (pride)_, #Ex# 204.

forscyldigian _to condemn_. for-scyldigod, -scyldegod _guilty_, Æ.

forscyppan = forscieppan

forscyrian _to separate_, MHF 159.

forscyttan _to exclude, prevent, obviate_, Æ. [‘_forshut_’]

forsēarian _to sear, dry up, wither_, Æ, CP.

forseawennes = forsewennes

forsēcan I. _to afflict_. II. = foresēcan

forsecgan _to accuse falsely, slander, accuse_, Æ: _to speak about,
discourse on_.

forsegenes f. _contempt_, #VPs# 122^4.

forsegenlic (GD 233^21) = forsewenlic

forsēgon = forsāwon pret. pl. of forsēon.

forsellan _to sell_, NC 289.

forsendan _to send away, banish, send to destruction_, AO.

forsēon^5 _to overlook, neglect, scorn, despise, reject, renounce_,
_Bl_; Æ, AO, CP: _refrain from_. [‘_forsee_’]

forsēones f. _care_, BH 84^7.

forsēoðan^2 _to wither, consume_, Æ.

forsērian (AS 10^4?) = forsēarian

forsētnian = forsǣtnian

forsettan I. _to hedge in, obstruct_, _BH_. [‘_forset_’] II. =
foresettan

forsettednes = foresetnes

forsewen pp. of forsēon.  [[from first edition]]

forsewenlic _despicable, ignominious, wretched, of poor appearance_.
adv. -līce, Æ.

forsewennes f. _contempt_, Æ, AO.

forsewestre (æ^2) f. _female despiser_, OEG 4430.

forsingian = forsyngian

forsittan^5 _to neglect, delay_, _LL_: _block, obstruct, besiege_, AO:
_injure_: _absent oneself (from)_. [‘_forsit_’]

forsīð = forðsīð

forsīðian _to perish_, B 1550.

for-slǣwan, -slāwian _to be slow, unwilling, delay, put off_, _Bo_; CP.
[‘_forslow_’]

forslēan^6 _to cut through, strike, break, kill, destroy_, AO.

forslegenlic _mean, ignominious_ (= forleg- ?).

forsliet m. _slaughter_, WW 28^18. [slieht]

forslītan _to consume, devour_, #PPs# 77^46.

forsmorian _to smother, suffocate, choke, stifle_, Æ.

forsorgian _to despond_, W 69^16.

forsōð _indeed, verily_, _Bo_. [‘_forsooth_’]

forspǣc = foresprǣc

forspanan^6 _to mislead, lead astray, seduce, entice_, _Æ_; CP.
[‘_forspan_’]

forspaning f. _allurement_, OEG.

forspeca = forespreca

forspecan^5 _to speak in vain_: _deny_.

forspēdian _to speed, prosper_.

forspendan _to spend, give out, squander, consume_, _AO_. [‘_forspend_’]

forspennen (OEG 612) = forspenning

forspennend m. _procurer_, #ÆGr# 36^11.

forspenn-ende, -endlic _seductive, voluptuous, defiling_, OEG.

forspennestre f. _procuress_, #ÆGr# 36^12.

forspenning f. _enticement, seduction, evil attraction_, Æ.

forspild m. _destruction_, CP 294^19.

for-spildan (CP) -spillan (_AO_) _to waste, lose, disperse, bring to
nothing, destroy, ruin, kill_. [‘_forspill_’]

forspillednes f. _waste, destruction, perdition_, Æ.

forsprec- = foresprec-

forspyll- = forspill-

forspyrcan _to dry up_, #PPs# 101^3.

forst (frost) m. ‘_frost_,’ _Ph, Rd_. [frēosan]

forstæppan = forestæppan  [[under “foresteppan”]]

forstal (_LL_) = foresteall

forstalian (refl.) _to steal away_, LL.

forstandan^2 _to defend, help, protect_, _LL_: _withstand, prevent,
hinder, resist, oppose_, _Met_: _benefit, avail_, CP: _understand_,
_Bo_; CP: _signify, be equal to_, EC, LL. [‘_forstand_’]

forsteall = foresteall

forstelan^4 _to steal away, steal, rob, deprive_, _MtR, LL_; Æ.
[‘_forsteal_’]

forstig ‘_frosty_,’ _BH_ (y); Æ.

forstlic _glacial, frozen_, WW 175^16.

forstoppian _to stop up, close_, #Lcd# 15b.

forstrang _very strong_, #Rd# 51^4.

forstrogdnes f. ‘_precipitatio_,’ NC 289.

forstyltan _to be amazed_, MkLR.

forstyntan _to blunt, break, crush_, WW 375^5.

forsūcan^2, forsūgan^2 _to suck out, empty_.

for-sugian (Æ, AO), -suwian (Æ) = for-swigian

forsuwung f. _silence_, OEG 2085.

forswǣlan _to burn, burn up, inflame, consume_, _Æ_. [‘_forsweal_’]

forswæð (DHy 38^16) = fōtswæð

forswāpan^7 † _to sweep away, drive off_.

forswarung f. _perjury_, NC 289.

forswefian ‘_prosperare_,’ #EPs# 117^25.

forswelan^4 _to burn, burn up_.

forswelgan^3 _to swallow up, devour, consume, absorb_, _B_; Æ, CP.
[‘_forswallow_’]

forsweltan^3 _to die_.

forsweogian = forswigian

forsweolgan = forswelgan

forsweorcan^3 _to grow dark, obscure_.

forsweorfan^3 _to polish, cleanse_: _grind away, demolish_.

forsweotole _very clearly_, ES 18·333; 43·162.

forswerian^6 (refl. and intr.) _to swear falsely_, _Æ, LL_: _renounce on
oath_, _B_. [‘_forswear_’]

forswigian _to conceal by silence, suppress, pass over_, Æ, CP: _be
silent_.

forswītan^1 _to impair_, TC 584^5.

forswīð _very great_, #Creat# 26.

forswīðan, forswīðian _to crush, press upon, overcome, repress_, CP.

forswīðe adv. _very much, utterly_, #Bo#.

forsworcenlic _dark, obscure_, DHy 24.

forsworcennes f. _darkening, darkness_, Æ, W.

forsworen (pp. of forswerian) _‘forsworn,’ perjured_, _Æ, Chr_.

forsworennes f. _perjury_, _Æ_. [‘_forswornness_’]

for-swugian (CP), -sygian = forswigian

forsyngian (i) _to sin greatly_. [‘_forsin_’] forsyngod m. _sinner_,
_LL_.

fortācen = foretācn

fortendan _to burn away, cauterize, sear_, AO 46^14.

fortēon^2 _to mislead, seduce_, _Cr_: _draw over, cover, obscure_.
[‘_foretee_’]

fortiht- = fortyht-

for-timbran, -timbrian _to close up, obstruct_.

fortogenes f. _griping, spasm_, #Lcd# 89a.

fortredan^5 _to tread down, trample on_, _Æ_; CP. [‘_fortread_’]

fortreding f. _treading down, crushing_, #Sc# 95^10.

fortrendan _to block (by rolling a stone)_, v. OEG 114.

fortrūgadnes, fortrūwednes = fortrūwodnes

fortrūwian _to be presumptuous, over-confident, rash_, CP.

fortrūwodnes f. _presumption_, CP.

fortrūwung f. _presumption_, #Bo# 9^7.

fortrymman _to testify, confirm_, NG.

fortyhtan _to seduce_, #El# 208.

fortyhtigend m. _polluter, defiler_, OEG 3337.

fortyllan _to seduce_, #Cr# 270.

fortymbrian = fortimbran

fortȳnan _to shut in, enclose, block up_, CP.

forð adv. _‘forth,’ forwards, onwards, further_, _A, B, BH, Ct_: _hence,
thence_: _away_, _Æ_: (time) _continually, still, continuously,
henceforth, thenceforward_, _B, Ep_: _simultaneously_. f. mid ealle
_forthwith_. f. on _continually_. fram orde oð ende f. _from the
beginning to the end_. f. ðæt _until_.

forð- (N) = furð-

forða = forðǣm

forðācīgan _to call forth_, BH 444^24.

forðādilgian _to bring to nothing, blot out_, MFH 160.

forðǣm, forðām, forðan (CP), forðon (AO, CP) I. conj. _for (the reason)
that, owing to (the fact) that, for, because, on that account,
therefore, seeing that_. for ðǣm ðe, etc. with same signification. II.
adv. _for that cause, consequently, therefore_.

forðāgoten _poured forth_, ÆL 23b^798.

forðahting (= eaht-) f. _exhortation_.

forðancful _very thankful_, ES 18·336; 43·162.

forðātēon^2 _to bring forth, produce_, Æ. pp. forðātogen.

forðāurnen ptc. _elapsed_, BH 280^21.

forðbǣre _productive_, #Gen# 132.

forðbecuman^4 _to come forth_.

forðberan^4 _to bring forth, produce_, _BH_; Æ. [‘_forthbear_’]

forðbesēon^5 _to look forth_, #LPs# 101^20.

forðbl, forðbie prep. _by, past_, CP 197^13.

forðbigferende _passer by_, NC 343.

forðblǣstan _to blow forth, burst out_, WW 393^33.

forðblāwan^7 _to blow forth, belch forth_, WW 397^10.

forðboren _of noble birth_.

forð-brengan, -bringan _to bring forth, produce_, _Bl, Lk_: _bring to
pass, accomplish_: _bring forward_: _adduce, quote_, Æ.

forðbylding f. _emboldening, encouragement_, #Chr# 999#e#.

forðclypian _to call forth_. [‘_forthclepe_’]

forðcuman^4 _to come forth, proceed, arrive at, succeed_: _come to pass,
come true_: _be born_.

forðcyme m. _coming forth, birth_, _Æ_. [‘_forthcome_’]

forðcȳðan _to announce, declare_, #CVPs# 118^26.

forðdōn _to put forth_, _BH_. [‘_forthdo_’]

forðearle _very much, greatly_, Æ.

forðearlīce _absolutely, entirely_, RB 11^19.

forðelgian (#KGl#) = forðyld(g)ian

forðencan (æ) _to mistrust, despise, despair_, _Ps_. pp. forðōht
_despaired of_; as sb. _poor wretch_, Æ: _reflect_, DHy 138^8.
[‘_forthink_’]

forðēofan _to steal_.

forðēon I. (sv^1,2) _to surpass, excel_, RB 131^19. II. _to crush,
oppress_, #Rood# 54.

forðēostrian (īe) _to darken_, #LPs# 104^28.

forðfæder m. _‘forefather,’ ancestor_, _Æ_.

forðfaran^6 _to depart, die_, _Bo, Chr_; Æ. [‘_forthfare_’]

±forðfēran _to depart, die_, Æ.

forð-fērednes, -fēring f. _death_.

forðflōwan _to flow_, BH 418^21.

forðfolgian _to follow_, CM 1052.

forðfōr I. f. _departure, death_, _BH_. [‘_forthfore_’] II. pret. 3 sg.
of forðfaran.

forðforlǣtenes f. _licence_, #Bo# 12^2.

forðframian _to grow to maturity_, WW 465^10.

forðfromung f. _departure_, #CVPs# 104^38.

forðfyligan _to follow, fall out, happen_, CM 1109.

forðgān anv., pret. 3 sg. -ēode _to go forth, advance, proceed, pass by,
go away, go on, precede, succeed_, _Chr, Mk_. [‘_forthgo_’]

forðgang m. _going forth, progress, advance, success_: _privy, drain_:
_purging, evacuation_, ÆL 16^207.

forðgangan^7 _to go forth_, _Ma_. [‘_forthgang_’]

forðgecīgan _to call forth_, #REPs# 67^7: _exhort_, BH 54^15.

forðgeclipian (y) _to call forth, provoke_, #Sc, EPs#.

forðgefaran = forðfaran

forðgefēran = forðfēran

forðgelǣstan = forðlǣstan

forðgelang _dependent_, LL (280^12).

forðgelēoran _to pass away, die_.

forðgelēorednes f. _departure, death_, GD 282^11.

forðgelōcian (#BPs# 101^20) = forðlōcian

forðgenge _increasing, effective, successful_, Æ, CP.

forðgeong = forðgang

forðgeorn _eager to advance_, #Ma# 281.

forðgēotan^2 _to pour forth_, _BH_. [‘_forthyete_’]

forðgerīmed _in unbroken succession_, B 59.

forðgesceaft † f. _creature, created being or thing, world_: _future
destiny_.

forðgestrangian ‘_confortare_,’ #LPs# 68^5.

forðgesȳne _visible, conspicuous_, #Cra# 1.

forðgewītan^1 _to go forth, pass, proceed, go by_: _depart, die_.
forðgewiten tīd, tīma _past tense_, #ÆGr#.

forðgewitenes f. _departure_, #LPs# 104^38.

forðgyrd m. _fore-girdle, martingale_, WW.

forðheald _bent forward, stooping_: _inclined, steep_, RB 5^20.

forðhealdan^7 _to hold to, follow out, keep up, observe_, Æ.

forðheold I. = forðheald. II. pret. 3 sg. of forðhealdan.

forðherge m. _van (of an army)_, #Ex# 225.

forðhlīfian _to be prominent_, BH 322^24.

forðhrēosan^2 _to rush forth_, #Sc# 101^13.

forðī = forðȳ

±forðian _to further, advance_, _Chr_: _carry out, accomplish_, _Chr_.
[‘_forth_’]

forðig = forðȳ

forðindan^3 _to swell up_, #Lcd#.

forðingian = foreðingian

forðlǣdan _to lead forth, bring forth_, _Sat_; Æ. [‘_forthlead_’]

forðlǣdnes f. _bringing forth_, BH 76^15.

forðlǣstan _to persevere in, accomplish_.

forðlǣtan^7 _to send forth, emit_.

forðlaðian _to invite_, #Bl#.

forðlēoran _to proceed_, BH 312^27.

forðlic _forward, advanced_, #Chr# 1066#d#.

forðlīfian = forðhlīfian

forðlōcian _to look forth_.

forðlūtan^2 _to lean forward, fall down_, #VPs#.

forðmǣre _very glorious_, #Creat# 69.

forðman m. _man of rank_, NC 289.

forðmest _foremost_, _MtL_. [‘_forthmost_’]

forðolian _to go without, lack_, #Wa# 38.

forð-on (_MH_) = furðum

for-ðon = forðǣm

forðoncol = foreðancul  [[headword spelled “foreðancol”]]

forðor = furðor

forðrǣcan (tr.) _to push out, protrude_, ÆL 25^135.

forðrǣsan _to rush forth, rise up_: _jut out, protrude_, #RPs# 72^7.
[rǣsan]

forðrǣstan (ē) _to crush, afflict, oppress_, _VPs_. [‘_forthrast_’]

forðrǣstednes (ē) f. _tribulation_.

forðres- = forðrys-

forðriccednes = forðryccednes

forðrihte adv. _straightway, at once_: _unmistakably, plainly_.

forðringan _to rescue from, defend against_, B 1084: _elbow out_?
_displace_? RB 115^7.

forðryccan _to press, squeeze, crush, oppress, suppress_.

forðryccednes (i) f. _pressure, oppression_.

forðrycnes f. _extortion, oppression, tribulation_, LL; MFH 159 (fore-).

forðryne m. _onward course_, #Gen# 215.

for-ðrysman, -ðrysmian _to choke, suffocate, strangle_. [ðrosm]

forðscacan^6 _to pass away_, #RPs# 143^4.

forðscencan _to pour forth, give to drink_, WW 464^9.

forðscype m. _progress_, BH 92^14 (c).

forðsetennes f. ‘_propositio_,’ MtR 12^4.

forðsīð m. _going forth, decease_, _Chr_; Æ, CP. [‘_forthsithe_’]

forðsīðian _to depart, die_, Æ.

forðsnoter (tt) † _very wise_, #El#.

forðspell n. _declaration_, #Mod# 47.

forðspōwnes f. _prosperity_, BH 106^25.

forð-stæppan, -steppan^6 _to issue forth, proceed, pass by_, ÆL:
_follow_, A 8·333^32.

forðstæpping f. _advance_, DHy 80^14.

forðsyllan _to give out, pay out_, LL 175[3].

forðtēg (#KGl#) = forðtīg

forðtēon^2 _to draw forth, bring forth_.

forðtīg (e^2, y^2) m. _vestibule_, OEG 3828.

forðtihting f. _exhortation_.

forðtȳg = forðtīg

forððegn m. _chief noble_, ÆL 6^125.

forððēon _to profit (‘proficere’)_, GD 200.

forðum = furðum

forðung f. _furtherance_, ANS 125^49.

forðweard (e^2) I. _inclined forward_: _advanced, progressing, growing,
ready_; _enduring, everlasting, continual_: _future_. adv.
_continually_, _PPs_: _prospectively_, _ÆGr_: _forwards, onwards_, W
17^8. [‘_forthward_’] II. m. _look-out man, pilot_? #Gen# 1436.

forðweardes _forwards_, HL 16^203 (e).

forðweardnes f. _progress_, GD 117^19.

forðweaxan^7 _to break forth, burst forth_, GD. [‘_forthwax_’]

forðweg m. _journey, departure_. in (on) forðwege _away_.

forðwerd == forðweard

forðwīf n. _matron_, WW 309^44.

forðwyrft _tortured, mutilated_, v. OEG 5028.

forðȳ I. conj. _for that, because, therefore_, _Jn_. [‘_forthy_’] II.
adv. _for that, therefore, consequently_.

for-ðyldian, -ðyld(i)gian, -ðyl(de)gian _to bear, support, endure, wait
patiently_, Æ.

forðylman †_to shut in, enclose, envelop, obscure, cover over,
overwhelm_: _suffocate, consume_.

forðyppan _to make manifest_, #CVPs#.

forðyrnan^3 _to run before, precede_: _continue_, Æ.

forðyrrian _to dry up_, #Lcd# 82b.

forðysmed _obscured_, WW 246^6.

forðȳðe = forðȳ

forud = forod

for-ūtan, -ūton adv.; prep. w. d. _except, without_, _Chr_ 1122.
[‘_forout_’]

forwærnan = forwiernan

forwærnian (WW 442^18) = forweornian

forwana m. _abundance_? CP 465^16.

forwandian _to hesitate, be reluctant_, CP: _be ashamed_.

forwandung f. _shame_, #SPs# 68^23.

forwarð = forwearð pret. 3 sg. of forweorðan.

forweard I. (NG) _beginning, front_: _heading, title, chapter_. II. adv.
_continually, always_, #Gen# 788. [?= forðweard; or foreweard, JGPh
12·257]

forweardmercung f. _heading_, JnL p3^1.

forweaxan^7 _to progress, grow too much, become overgrown_, _CP_; AO.
[‘_forwax_’]

forweddod _pledged_. [wedd]

forwegan^5 _to kill_, #Ma# 228.

forwel adv. _very, very well_, Æ.

forwened _insolent_. [wenian]

forwēned ‘_suspectus_,’ BDS 30·12^104. [wēnan]

forwenednes f. _insolence_, ANS 79·89.

forweoren = forworen

forweornan = forwiernan

forweornian _to dry up, wither, fade, grow old, rot, decay_, Æ.

forweorpan^3 _to throw, cast out, cast down, drive off, reject, throw
away, squander_, _B_. [‘_forwerpe_’]

forweorpnes f. _migration_, MtL 1^17.

forweorðan^3 (y) _to perish, pass away, vanish_, _Mt_; AO, CP, Æ. f. on
mōde _be grieved_. [‘_forworth_’]

forweorðenes = forwordenes

forweorðfullic _excellent_, #Bo# 65^15.

forweosnian = forwisnian

forwercan = forwyrcan

forwerd = foreweard

forwered = forwerod

forwerednes f. _old age_, #SPs# 70^18.

forweren (WW 217^15) = forworen

forwerennes (#RPs# 70^18) = forwerednes

forwernedlice _continently_, W 284^8. [forwiernan]

forwerod _worn out, very old_, Æ. [werian]

forwesing f. _destroying_.

forwest = forewost

forwiernan (e, eo, i, y) _to hinder, prohibit, prevent, repel, refuse,
repudiate, deny, withhold, oppose_, _AO, B_ (y); CP. [‘_forwarn_’]

forwird = forwyrd

forwirn- = forwiern-

forwisnian (eo) _to wither away, dry up, decay, rot_.

forwitan = forewitan

forwitolnes f. _intelligence, diligence_. [= fore-]

forwlencan _to fill with pride, puff up_, _CP_. [‘_forwlench_’]

forword I. n. _iota_, MtL 5^18. II. = foreweard

forwordenes f. _destruction, failure_.

forwordenlic _perishable_, W 263^13.

forworen (pp. of *forweosan) _decrepit, decayed_, OEG 2109.

forworhta = forwyrhta

forwracned _banished_, RB 82^2.

forwrecan^5 _to drive forth, carry away_: _expel, banish_.

forwrēgan _to accuse, calumniate_, _Chr_. [‘_forwray_’]

forwrēon^1 _to cover over_, LkR 23^45.

forwrītan^1 _to cut in two_, B 2705.

forwrīðan^1 _to bind up_, #Lcd# 122a.

forwundian _to wound_, _Chr_. [‘_forwound_’]

forwundorlic _very wonderful_, GD. adv. -līce.

forwurðan = forweorðan

forwyrcan (e) _to do wrong, sin_, Æ, CP. forworht mann _criminal_, CP:
_ruin, undo, destroy_, _Cr_; Æ, AO, CP: _condemn, convict, curse_:
_forfeit_: _barricade, obstruct, close up_.

forwyrd fn. _destruction, ruin, fall, death_, Æ, CP. [forweorðan]

forwyrdan _to perish_, #Andr#.

forwyrdendlic _perishable_.

forwyrht n. _misdeed_, MF 160.

forwyrhta m. _agent, deputy_: _evil-doer, malefactor, ruined person_.
[fore-]

forwyrnan (Æ) = forwiernan

forwyrnednes f. _restraint, self-denial, continence_, BH 160^10.

forwyrpnes f. _casting out_, _LPs_ 21^7.

foryld = foreald

foryldan = forieldan

foryrman _to reduce to poverty, bring low_, BH, W. [earm]

fossere m. _spade_. [_L._ fossorium]

fōster == fōstor

fōstor n. _sustenance, maintenance, food, nourishment_, _Lcd_; Æ.
[‘_foster_’]

fōstorbearn n. _foster-child_.

fōstorbrōðor m. ‘_foster-brother_,’ WW.

fōstorcild (e^2) n. _foster-child_, ÆL.

fōstorfæder m. ‘_foster-father_,’ MH.

fōstorland n. _land granted for the support of the recipients_, _Ct_.
[‘_fosterland_’]

fōstorlēan n. _payment for maintenance_, LL 442[2]; #Men# 152.

fōstorling m. _foster-child, nursling_, _WW_. [‘_fosterling_’]

fōstormann m. _bondsman, security_.

fōstormōdor f. ‘_foster-mother_,’ _MH_.

fōstornōð m. _pasture, sustenance_, #EPs# 22^2.

fōstorsweostor f. _foster-sister_.

fōstrað (e^2) m. _food_: _manna_.

fōstrian _to ‘foster,’ nourish_, _Sc_ (ē).

fōstring m. _disciple_, NG.

fōstur = fōstor

fōt m. ds. fēt, fōte, nap. fēt, fōtas _foot (as limb and as measure)_,
_B, LL, NG_; Æ, AO, CP.

fōtādl fn. _gout in the feet_.

fōtādlig _having gout in the feet_.

fōtbred n. _foot-board, stirrup_, WW 107^6.

fōtclāð m. ‘_commissura_’? MtL 9^16.

±fōtcopsian, ±fōtcypsan _to fetter_, #Pss#.

fōt-cosp, -cops m. _foot-fetter_, Æ.

fōtcoðu f. _gout in the feet_, OEG.

fōtece m. _gout in the feet_, #Lcd#.

fōter n. _darnel, tares_, MtL 13^27.

fōtfeter f. _fetter for the feet_, WW 116^8.

fōtgangende _going on foot_, OEG 5254.

fōtgemearc n. _foot-measurement, space of a foot_, B 3043.

fōtgemet n. _foot-fetter_, #EPs# 104^18.

fōtgewǣde fn? _covering for the feet_, RB 88^14.

+fōtian _to hasten up_, MkL 15^44.

fōt-lāst (Æ), -lǣst mf. _footprint, spoor_.

fōtlic _on foot, pedestrian_.

fōtmǣl n. _foot-measure_.

fōtmǣlum adv. _step by step, by degrees_, CM 883.

fōtrāp m. _the loose part of the sheet by which a sail is trimmed to the
wind, ‘propes,’_ WW 167^11.

fōtsceamol (e^2, e^3, u^3) m. _footstool_, Æ.

fōtsceanea m. _foreleg_, _Lcd_ 1·362. [v. ‘_shank_’]

fōtsetl n. _footstool_, #Chr# 1053#c#.

fōtsīd _reaching to the feet_, NC 289.

fōtspor n. _footprints, spoor_, #Lcd#.

fōtspure n. _foot-rest, foot-support_, #Chr# 1070#e#.

fōtstān m. _base, pedestal_, Æ.

fōtstapol m. _footstep_, #LPs# 17^37.

fōtswæð n. (nap. -swaðu), fōtswaðu f. _footprint, footstep_: _foot_, Æ.

fōtswile (y) m. _swelling of the foot_, #Lcd#.

fōtðwēal n. _washing of the feet_, W, WW.

fōtwærc n. _pain in the foot, gout_, #Lcd#.

fōt-welm, -wylm, -wolma m. _sole of the foot_, Æ.

fōð ind. pres. pl. of fōn.

fōð-or (-er, -ur) n. _load, cartload_, _Chr_: _food, fodder_: _covering,
case, basket_. [‘_fother_’]

fōðorn m. _lancet_, #Lcd# 19b.

fōwer = fēower

fox m. ‘_fox_,’ _Lk, VPs_.

foxesclāte f. _burdock_, #Lcd# 54a.

foxesclīfe f. _foxglove_? _greater burdock_? WW 135#n#1.

foxesfōt m. _fox-foot, xiphion_, #Lcd#.

foxesglōfe f. _foxglove_, WW 296^25.

foxhyll m. _fox-hill_.

foxung f. _foxlike wile, craftiness_, ÆL 16^162.

fra = fram

fraced, fraceð, fracod == fracoð

fracoð I. adj. _vile, bad, wicked, criminal, impious, filthy,
abominable_, _BH_: _useless, worthless_. [‘_fraced_’] II. n. _insult,
contumely, disgrace_: _wickedness_.

fracoðdǣd (-od) f. _misdeed_, W 188^15.

fracoðe adv. _contemptuously, shamefully_.

fracoðlic _base, ignominious, shameful, lewd_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce, CP.

fracoð-licnes, -nes (Æ) f. _vileness, coarseness, obscenity_.

fracoðscipe (-od) _scandalous conduct_, RB 141^6.

fracoðword n. _insulting word_, GD 152^7.

fracud, fracuð == fracoð

frǣ- = frēa-

fræc == frec

frǣc- = frēc- (v. ES 39·327 ff. as to these four forms).

  [[Printed on one line:
  fræc == frec; frǣc- = frēc-]]

fræcful _greedy_, OEG 2445.

fræcmāse (e) f. _titmouse_, WW.

frǣcūð (#Gl#) = fracoð

fræfel n? _cunning_, #Gl#.

fræfele _bold, insolent, cunning_. [_Ger._ frevel]

fræfelian _to be cunning_, #Gl#.

fræfellīce _shamelessly_, AO (e): _astutely_.

fræfelnes f. _sharpness, shrewdness_, OEG.

+frǣge (ē) I. † n. _hearsay, report, knowledge_. mine +f. _as I have
heard say_. II. adj. _well-known, celebrated, reputable_, CP:
_notorious, disreputable_. [fricgan]

frægn I. pret. 3 sg. of frignan. II. fregen II.

frægning f. _questioning_.

fræm- = frem-

frǣmicel _pre-eminent_, WW 530^13.

fræng = frægn

±fræpgian (NG) _to accuse_: _reverence_.

frǣt I. † _perverse, proud, obstinate_. II. pret. 3 sg. of fretan.

frætegung (Æ) = frætwung

frætew-, frætew- = frætw-

frætgenga m. _apostasy_, #Gl#.

frǣtig _perverse, proud_, #Jul# 284.

frætlæppa m. _dew-lap_, WW 179^3.

frǣton pres. pl. of fretan.

frætwa, frætwe fp. _treasures, ornaments, trappings, armour_: m.
_adorner_, #Cr# 556. [+tāwe]

frætwædnes = frætwednes

±frætwan, fræt(te)wian _to ornament, adorn_, AO: _clothe, cover over_,
CP 83^10.

fræt-wednes, -wodnes f. _adorning, decoration, ornament_.

frætwian v. frætwan.

frætwung f. _adorning, decoration, ornament_, Æ.

fragendlic = framigendlic

+frāgian _to learn by inquiry_, MtL 2^16.

fram (o) I. prep. w. d. (instr.) (local) _‘from,’ by_, _Æ, Bl, Chr_:
(temporal) _since_, _A, Ma_: (agent) _by_, _Bl_: _as a result of_, _Mt_:
(with verbs of saying and hearing) _of, about, concerning_. f. gān _to
depart_. comps. v. fram-, from-. II. adv. _from, forth, out, away_. III.
adj. (eo) _strenuous, active, bold, strong_. [_Ger._ fromm]

framācyrran = framcyrran (in this and the following words fram- may
often be taken as a separate preposition).

framādōn anv. _to take from, do away, cut off, cut out_.

framādrȳfan^1 _to drive away, expel_.

framāhyldan _to turn from_, #Lcd#.

framānȳdan _to drive away_.

framāscæcan^6 _to shake off_.

framāstyrian _to remove_, #RPs# 65^20.

framātēon^2 _to draw away from_.

framāteran^4 ‘_diripere_,’ #ÆGr# 168^10.

framāwendan _to turn from or away_.

framāweorpan^3 _to cast away_, #ÆGr#.

frambīge m. _apostasy_, W 49^12.

frambringan^3 _to take away_, #Lcd#.

framceorfan^3 _to cut off_.

framcyme (o) m. _issue, posterity_, #Gen# 1765.

framcynn (o) n. _issue, posterity_: _origin_.

framcyrran (e) _to turn from, avert_: _take from_.

framdōn anv. _to put off, stop, interrupt_, #Sc# 131^8.

framfæreld m? n? _departure_, Æ.

framfaru (o) f. _excess_, DR 17^8.

framfundung f. _departure_.

framgewītan^1 _to apostatize_, #Sc# 83^2.

framian _to avail, benefit_, RB.

framierning (o^1, e^2) f. _outflowing_, DR 8^1.

framigendlic _effective_.

framlād f. _departure_, #Gen# 2098 (o).

framlēce _turned from_, GPH 401.

framlic _strong_. adv. -līce _boldly, strongly, strenuously, quickly_.

framlōcian (o^1) _to look back_, CP 403^6.

framnes (o^1) f. _vigour_, #Nar# 7^22.

framscīpe I. m. _exercise, action_. II. m. _fraternity_.

framsetnung f. _foundation_, JnR 17^24.

framsīð (o) m. _departure_.

framslitnes f. _desolation_, NG (o).

framswengan _to swing away, shake off_, WW 524^30.

framung = fremung

framweard (o) _about to depart, doomed to die_, _Bo, Seaf_; CP:
_enterprising_? [‘_fromward_’]

framweardes (o) adv. _away from_, _Lcd_. [‘_fromwards_’]

frān pret. 3 sg. of frīnan.  [[under “frignan”]]

franca m. _lance, javelin_, Æ.

±frāsian _to ask, inquire, find out by inquiry_: _tempt, try_.

frāsung f. _questioning, temptation_.

fratwian = frætwian  [[under “frætwan”]]

frēa † I. m. gs. frēan _ruler, lord, king, master_: _the Lord, Christ,
God_: _husband_. [_Goth._ frauja] II. (#VPs#) = frēo I.

frēa- intensitive prefix (= _L._ per-).

frēabeorht _glorious_.

frēabeorhtian (ǣ) _to proclaim_, #CPs# 41^9.

frēabodian _to proclaim, declare_, #LPs# 118^172.

frēadrēman _to exult_, #LPs#.

frēadrihten † m. _lord, master_.

frēafætt (ǣ^1) _very fat_, WW 532^24.

frēaglēaw _very wise_, #Dan# 88.

frēahræd (ǣ^1, -hræð) _very quick_, #Gl#.

frēamǣre † _very celebrated_.

frēamicel (ǣ^1) _pre-eminent_, WW 530^13.

frēamiht _great strength_, #RPs# 42^2.

freamsum = fremsum

frēan = frēon

  [[Cross-reference uncertain: variant of “frēogan” or form of “frēo”?]]

frēaofestlice (ǣ^1) _very quickly_, WW 530^13.

frēareccere m. _prince_, #LRPs# 118^161.

frēas pret. 3 sg. of frēosan.

frēasian = frāsian

frēatorht _very bright, radiant_.

frēaðancian _to exult_, #RPs# 52^7.

frēawine † m. _lord and friend_.

frēawlitig _very beautiful_, NC 290.

frēawrāsn f. _splendid chain_, B 1451.

frēbran = frēfran

frec (æ, i) _greedy_, _MtL_ (i); Æ: _eager, bold, daring_, _Met_:
_dangerous_ (v. ES 39·327 ff.). [‘_freck_’]

freca † m. _warrior, hero_.

frēced- = frēcen-

frēcelnes = frēcennes

frēcelsod _exposed to danger_, WW 465^25.

frēcen n. gs. frēcnes _danger, peril_.

frēcendlic, frēcenlic (CP) _dangerous, mischievous, perilous, terrible_.
adv. -līce, AO.

frēcennes f. _harm, danger_, CP.

freceo ‘_lucor_’? ‘_lurcor_’? Cp 1240 (v. ES 39·336; 42·168).

frecful (æ) _greedy_, OEG 2445.

freclīce _greedily_, GD 31^1.

frecmāse = fræcmāse

frēcn- = frēcen-

frēcne (ǣ) I. _dangerous, perilous_, CP: _terrible_: _savage, wicked_:
_daring, bold_. [v. ES 39·328f.] II. adv. _dangerously_: _fiercely,
severely_: _boldly, audaciously_.

frecnes f. _greediness_.

frēcnes = frēcennes

+frecnian _to make bold_, #Da# 184: _endanger, imperil_, ÆL 30·436.

frecwāsend m. _gluttony_, A 6·100.

+frēdan _to feel, perceive_, _Æ, Bo_; CP. [‘_frede_’; frōd]

+frēdendlic _perceptible_, #ÆGr# 4^6.

+frēdmǣlum _little by little_, OEG 3245.

+frēdnes f. _feeling, perception_, #Bo#.

+frēdra _more acute_, CP 123^19.

frefelīce = fræfellīce

frēfernes f. _consolation_.

±frēfran _to cheer, comfort, console_, _BH_; CP. [‘_frover_’]

frēfrend (ie^2) mf. _comforter, consoler_: _the Comforter (Holy Ghost)_,
#Bl#.

frēfrian (_Jn_; Æ) = frēfran

frēfriend = frēfrend

frēfrung f. _consolation_, #Gen# 37^35.

+frēge = +frǣge

fregen, fregn I. = frægn pret. 3 sg. of frignan. II. n. _question_, #An#
255.

fregnan = frignan

fregnðearle _enquiringly_, ÆL 23^566.

fregnung f. _questioning_, MkL p4^19.

freht n? ‘_auspicium_,’ DR 97^7.

frem = fram adj.

fremde _foreign, alien, strange_, _LL_; AO, CP: _unfriendly_, _Sol_
(-ede): _estranged from, devoid of, remote from_. [‘_fremd_’]

±fremdian _to estrange_, RB: _curse_, MkLR (v. A 16·127).

freme I. † _vigorous, flourishing_, _B, Gen_. [‘_frim_’; fram] II. =
fremu

fremede = fremde

fremedlǣcan _to alienate_, #RPs# 57^4.

±fremednes f. _accomplishment, fulfilment, effect_, Æ.

fremful _useful, profitable, beneficial_, _Lcd_. [‘_fremeful_’] adv.
-līce _efficaciously_.

fremfulnes f. _utility, profit_, RB 83^18.

±fremian, fremman _to further, advance, support_, _An, B_: _frame, make,
do, perpetrate, commit, afford_, _B, Gen_; CP: (w. d.) _avail, benefit,
do good_, _Æ, Mt_. [‘_freme_’]

fremlic (eo, o) _profitable_, BH 30^28.

±fremming f. _purpose, effect, performance, progress_, Æ.

fremnes = fremednes

fremsum _beneficent, benign, kind, gracious_, Æ, CP.

fremsumlic _benignant, kind_, GD 280. adv. -līce, CP.

fremsumnes f. _benefit, benignity, kindness, liberality_.

fremð- (NG) = fremd-

+fremðian _to curse_, MkL 14^71.

fremðlic = frymðlic

fremu f. _advantage, gain, benefit_, _Bo, Ep, Lcd_; CP. [‘_freme_’]

fremung (eo, o) f. _advantage, profit, good_.

Frencisc ‘_French_,’ _Chr_.

frēnd == frēond

frendian _to anathematize_, WW 484^31. [cp. +fremðian]

freng = frægn pret. 3 sg. of frignan.

frēo I. nap. often frīge ‘_free_,’ _Bo, Ex, JnR_; CP, Æ: (†) _glad,
joyful_: (†) _noble, illustrious_, _Gen_. [frēo- v. also frīg-] II. † f.
_woman, lady_. III. m. = frēa. IV. imperat. of frēogan. V. f? _freedom,
immunity_.

frēobearn n. _free-born child, child of gentle birth_.

frēoborh = friðborh

frēobrōðor m. _own brother_, #Ex# 338.

frēoburh f. _city_, B 694.

frēod I. † f. _peace, friendship_: _goodwill, affection_. II. pp. of
frēogan. III. = frēot

frēode pret. 3 sg. of frēogan.

frēodohtor f. _freeborn daughter_, W 193^6.

frēodōm m. _‘freedom,’ state of free-will, charter, emancipation,
deliverance_, _Bo_; AO, CP.

frēodryhten † = frēadrihten

frēodscipe (ES 39·340) = frēondscipe?

±frēogan _to ‘free,’ liberate, manumit_, _Æ, Chr_; AO: _love, embrace,
think of lovingly, honour_.

frēoge = +frǣge

frēoh = frēo

frēolāc n. _freewill offering, oblation_, #LPs# 50^21.

frēolǣta m. _freedman_, WW.

±frēolic _free, freeborn_: _glorious, stately, magnificent, noble_, _B_:
_beautiful, charming_. [_‘freely_’] adv. -līce ‘_freely,’ readily_, _Bo,
VPs_.

frēols I. mn. _freedom, immunity, privilege_: _feast-day, festival_.
[origl. frīheals] II. = frēo I.

frēolsǣfen m. _eve of a feast_, LL 383[56].

frēolsbōc f. _charter of freedom_, Ct.

frēolsbryce (i) m. _breach of festival_.

frēolsdæg m. _feast-day, festival-day_, Æ.

frēolsdōm = frēodōm

frēols-end, -iend m. _liberator_, #EPs#.

frēolsgefa m. _emancipator_, LL 13[8].

frēolsgēr n. _year of jubilee_, WW 420^31.

frēolsian (±) _to deliver, liberate_, #Bl, EPs#: _to keep a feast or
holy day, celebrate_, _Æ_. [‘_frels_’]

frēolslic _festive, festival_, CM 350. adv. _freely_: _solemnly_.

frēolsmann m. _freedman_, KC 3·295^6.

frēolsniht f. _eve of a festival_, NC 290.

frēolsstōw f. _festival-place_, LL 338[38].

frēolstīd f. _festival, feast-day_, Æ.

frēolsung f. _celebration of a feast_.

freom = fram III.

freom- = fram-, frem-

frēomǣg † m. _free-kinsman_.

frēomann m. _‘free-man,’ freeborn man_, _Gen, LL_.

frēonama m. _surname_, BH.

frēond m. ds. frīend, nap. frīend, frēond, frēondas _‘friend,’
relative_, _B, El, Gen_; AO, CP: _lover_.

frēondheald _amiable_, #Lcd# 3·192^15.

frēondhealdlic _related, akin_, WW 217^29.

frēondlār f. _friendly counsel_, B 2377.

frēondlaðu f. _friendly invitation_, B 1192.

frēondlēas ‘_friendless_,’ _JnL_. f. mann _outlaw_, _LL_.

frēondlēast f. _want of friends_, _LL_ 336[35].

frēondlic _friendly, well-disposed, kindly_, BH, W. adv. -līce, CP.

frēondlīðe _kind to one’s friends_, ES 39·340.

frēondlufu f. _friendship, love_, #Gen# 1834.

frēondmyne f. _amorous intention_, #Gen# 1831.

frēondrǣden f. _friendship_, Æ: _conjugal love_.

frēondscipe m. ‘_friendship_,’ _B, Lcd_; AO, CP: _conjugal love_.

frēondspēd f. _abundance of friends_.

frēondspēdig _rich in friends_.

frēone asm. of frēo adj.

frēonoma = frēonama

frēorig † _freezing, frozen, cold, chilly_: _blanched with fear, sad,
mournful_. [frēosan]

frēorig-ferð, -mōd † _sad_, #Gu#.

frēoriht n. _rights of freemen_, LL, W.

±frēosan^2 _to ‘freeze,’_ _Æ, Bl_.

frēosceat m. _freedman_, RB 138^21.

frēot m. _freedom_, LL. frēotes ðolian _to be reduced to slavery_.

frēotgifa m. _liberator_, WW.

frēot-gifu, -gift f. _emancipation_, WW.

frēotmann m. _freedman_, #Bk#, TC, W.

freoð- = frið-

-frēoðan^2 v. ā-f.

freoðo- = friðo-

freoðu- = friðu-

frēowīf (i^1) n. _free-woman_, LL 7[73].

frēowine = frēawine

Fresan = Frisan

Fresisc (y) _in the Frisian manner, Frisian_, #Chr#. [Frisan]

±fretan^5 _to devour, eat, consume_, CP: _break_, #Ex# 147. [for, etan]

fretgenga = frætgenga

frettan _to feed upon, consume_. [fretan]

frettol _greedy, gluttonous_, WW 171^34.

fretw- = frætw-

freðo = friðu

freðo- = friðo-, friðu

frī = frēo I.

frīa = frēa

frīand (A) = frēond

frīborh (v. LL 2·81) = friðborh

fric (NG) = frec

fricca, friccea m. _herald, crier_, CP (? v. ES 39·336).

fricgan^5 † _to ask, inquire into, investigate_: (+) _learn, find out by
inquiry_. [frignan; cp. _Ger._ fragen]

frīcian _to dance_, _Mt_. [‘_frike_’]

friclan † w. g. _to seek, desire_.

friclo f. _appetite_, #Lcd# 73a.

frico f. ‘_usura_,’ MtL 25^27 (v. ES 39·328f.).

fricolo adv. _eagerly, fervently_.

frictrung (OET 26) = frihtrung

frīdhengest = frīðhengest?  [[headword spelled “friðhengest”]]

frīenan = frīnan = frignan

frīend v. frēond.

+frīend pl. _friends_, _Lk_ (ȳ). [‘_i-freond_’]

frīg == frēo

frīgan = frēogan

frīgdæg = frīgedæg

frīge I. † fp. _love_. II. v. frēo.

frīgea m. _lord, master_, LL (= frēa).

frīgeǣfen m. _Thursday evening_, Æ.

frīgedæg m. ‘_Friday_,’ _LL, Ma_; Æ.

+frīgend m. _liberator_, #VPs#.

frigenes = frignes

frīgeniht f. _Thursday night_, W 305^24.

frigest, frigeð pres. 2, 3 sg. of fricgan.

+frīgian _to embrace_, MkL 10^16.

±frignan^3, frīnan _ask, inquire_, _B, BH, Cp, Ps_; AO, CP. [‘_frayne_’]

±frignes f. _interrogation, question_.

frignung f. _question_, GD 137^29.

frigst, frihst pres. 2 sg. of fricgan.

frihtere m. _diviner, soothsayer_. [freht]

frihtrian _to divine_.

frihtrung f. _soothsaying, divination_, WW.

frimdig = frymdig

frīnan = frignan

frīnd = frīend

frīo == frēo

frīs (ȳ) _crisped, curled_, #GnE# 96.

Frisan (e) mp. _Frisians_, AO.

frisca = frysca

fristmearc (#Gl#) = firstmearc

frit, friteð, fritt pres. 3 sg. of fretan.

frið (y) mn. _peace, tranquillity, security, refuge_, _AO_; CP, Æ.
f. niman _to make peace_: _privilege of special protection, and penalty
for the breach of it_, LL 10[5]: _restoration of rights (to an outlaw)_,
LL 316[13]. [‘_frith_’]

frīð _stately, beautiful_, #Rd# 10^9.

friða (eo) m. _protector_, #PPs# 70^3.

frīðāð m. _oath of peace_, #Chr# 1012#e#.

friðbēna m. _suppliant, refugee_, LL.

friðborh m. _surety for peace_, LL.

friðbræc f. _breach of the peace_, LL.

friðburg f. _town with which there is peace, city of refuge_, LL
222[2,1].

friðcandel † f. _the sun_.

friðelēas = friðlēas

friðgeard m. _enclosed space_, LL: _court of peace (heaven)_, #Cr#.

friðgedāl n. _death_, #Gen# 1142. [ferhð?]

friðgegilda m. _member of a peace-guild_, LL 173 Pro.

friðgeorn _peaceable_, MtL 5^9.

friðgewrit n. _peace agreement_, LL 144.

friðgild n. _peace guild_, LL 181.

friðgīsl m. _peace-hostage_, LL 378[9,1].

friðhengest (frid-) m. _horse of peace_? #Rd# 23^4.

friðhūs n. _sanctuary_, WW 186^23.

friðian (eo) _to give_ ‘frið’ _to, make peace with, be at peace with_:
(±) _cherish, protect, guard, defend, keep_, _AO, Chr_; CP: _observe_.
[‘_frith_’]

friðiend m. _helper, defender_, #PPs#, W 239^7.

friðland n. _friendly territory_, #Chr#.

friðlēas _peaceless, outlawed_, LL 318.

friðlic _mild, lenient_, LL.

friðmāl n. _article of peace_, LL 220 Pro. [mǣl]

friðmann m. _man under special peace-protection_, LL 222.

friðo == freoðu, frið  [[redirected to “friðu”]]

friðobēacen (eo^1) n. _sign of peace_, #Gen# 1045.

friðoscealc (eo) † m. _angel_.

friðosibb f. _peace-bringer_, B 2017.

friðospēd (eo) † f. _abundant peace_.

friðotācn n. _sign of peace_, #Gen# 2369.

friðoðēawas † (eo^1) mp. _place_.

friðowǣr (eo^1) † f. _treaty of peace_.

friðowang (eo^1) m. _peaceful plain_, B 2959.

friðowaru (eo) † f. _protection_.

friðo-webba (eo^1) ‡ m., -webbe † f. _peace-maker_.

friðscipe m. _ship for defence_, LL 441 (? read fyrdscipe).

friðsōcn f. _sanctuary, asylum_, LL.

friðsplott m. _peace-spot_, LL (248^5).

friðstōl m. _sanctuary, asylum, refuge_, _LL, Ps_. [‘_frithstool_’]

friðstōw f. _refuge, sanctuary_.

friðsum _pacific, peaceful_: (+) _safe, fortified_.

friðsumian _to make peaceful, protect_? NC 290.

friðu (eo) fm. _peace, safety, protection_, _AO, Mt_: _refuge, asylum_.
[‘_frith_’]

friðu- = friðo-

frocga = frogga

frōd † _wise_: _old_.

frōdian _to be wise_, #Rim# 32.

frōfer == frōfor

frōferian = frēfran

frōfor fmn. (e^2, u^2) gs. frōfre _consolation, joy, refuge_, _Æ_; CP:
_compensation, help, benefit_. [‘_frover_’]

frōforbōc (e^2) f. _book of consolation_, #Bo# 50^6.

frōforgāst (frōfre-) m. _consoling spirit, Holy Ghost, Comforter_, _Jn_;
Æ. [v. ‘_frover_’]

frōforlic (e^2) _kind, helpful_, W. adv. -līce, W 295^3.

frōfornes f. _consolation_, LkL 6^24 (oe).

frōforword n. _word of consolation_, GD 344^28.

frōfrian = frēfran

frogga m. ‘_frog_,’ _Æ, WW_.

froht (NG) = forht

from == fram

from- also = frem-, frum-

froren pp. of frēosan.

frosc = forsc

frost = forst

frōwe f. _woman_, DD 291. [_Ger._ frau]

frox = forsc

frugnen pp., frugnon pret. pl. of frignan.

frum I. _primal, original, first_. II. = fram

fruma m. _beginning, origin, cause_, AO, CP: _creation_, #Chr# 33:
_originator, inventor, founder, creator_: _first-born_, #CPs# 135^10:
(†) _prince, king, chief, ruler_. on fruman _at first_. wæstma fruman
_firstfruits_. [fram]

frumācennes f. _nativity_, JnL p5^19.

frumbearn n. _first-born child_.

frumbyrd f. _birth_, TC 369^9.

frumbyrdling n. _youth_, _WW_ 171^23. [‘_frumberdling_’]

frumcenned _first-begotten, firstborn_, Æ, AO: _original, primitive_,
#ÆGr#.

frumcnēow n. _primal generation_, #Ex# 371.

frumcyn † n. _ancestry, origin, descent, lineage_: _race, tribe_.

frumcynnend = frumcenned

frumcyrr m. _first time_, LL 164[25,2].

frumdysig n. _first offence_, NC 290.

frum-gār †, -gāra † m. _leader, patriarch, chieftain, noble_. [cp. _L._
primi-pilus]

frumgesceap n. _creation of the world_, #Cr# 840.

frumgeweorc n. _original construction_, A 11·174^6.

frumgewrit n. _deed, document_, W 252^12.

frumgifu f. _prerogative, privilege_, #Gl#.

frumgrīpa m. _firstling_, W 113^6.

frumgyld n. _first instalment_, LL 190.

frumhēowung (ī) f. _original formation_, WW 467^27.

frumhrægl n. _first garment_ (sc. _of fig-leaves_), #Gen# 943.

frumildo f. _primeval time_, WW 341^22. [ieldo]

frumlēoht n. _dawn_, AF 4·56.

frumlic _original, primitive_. adv. -līce.

frumlīda m. _chief sailor_, v. OEG 32.

frumlȳhtan _to dawn_, #Bl# 207^35.

frummynetslege m. _first coinage_, ÆL 23^479.

frumrǣd m. _primary ordinance_, LL 246.

frumrǣden f. _space of time_, #An# 147.

frumrinc (o^1) _chieftain_, RHy 4^15.

frumrīpa m. _firstfruits_, LL 40[38].

frumsceaft f. _first creation, origin, primeval condition_, _B_:
_creature_: _home_. [‘_frumschaft_’]

frumsceapen _first created, first_, Æ.

frumsceatt m. _firstfruits_, #ELPs#.

frumscepend m. _creator_, DR 16^10.

frumscyld † f. _original sin_.

frumsetnes f. _authority_, DR 123^8.

frumsetnung f. _foundation, creation_, JnR 17^24.

frumslǣp m. _first sleep_, AO.

frumspellung f. _recapitulation_, OEG 1153; 2^31.

frumsprǣc f. _first saying_: _promise_.

frumstaðol m. _first state_, #Rd# 61^3.

frumstemn m. _prow_, WW 288^21.

frumstōl m. _first or principal seat, paternal home_, LL.

frumtalu f. _first statement_ (_of a witness_?) LL 385.

frumtīd f. _beginning_, GD 212^5.

frumtȳhtle f. _first accusation, first charge_, LL 336 (35). [tēon II.]

frumð = frymð

frumwæstm mf. _firstfruits_.

frumweorc n. _primeval work, creation_, #An# 805.

frumwīfung f. _first marriage_, W 304^27.

frumwylm m. _new-born zeal_, RB 135^5.

frumwyrhta m. _creator_, DR 37^4.

frunen pp., frun(n)on pret. pl. of frīnan.  [[under “frignan”]]

frungon = frugnon pret. pl. of frignan.

fruron pret. pl. of frēosan.

frȳ == frēo

fryccea = fricca

fryht- (N) = forht-, fyrht-

frylsian (#Bo#) = freolsian  [[headword spelled “frēolsian”]]

frym- = frum-, fyrm-

frymdig (i) _curious, inquisitive_, Æ: _desirous_. f. bēon _to entreat_.

frymetling f. _young cow_, LL 451[13].

frymð I. mf. _origin, beginning, foundation_, _Bo_; Æ, AO: (in pl.)
_creation_, _El_: _creature_. [‘_frumth_’] II. = fyrmð

frymð-lic, -elic _primeval, primitive, first_. adv. -līce, OEG 5211.

frymðu, frymðo (_MtL_) = frymð

frymðyldo ‘_primævus_’? v. OEG 2381.

frȳnd (Æ) nap. of frēond.

frȳs = frīs

Frysan = Frisan

frysca I. (i) m. _kite, bittern_, #Gl#. II. ‘_pusio_’? #Gl# (v. A
19·495).

frȳsð pres. 3 sg. of frēosan.

fryt pres. 3 sg. of fretan.

fryð == frið

fryð- also = freoð-, fyrð-

fugel == fugol

fugelbona m. _fowler_, #Cra# 80.

fugeldoppe f? _water-fowl_, WW 131^20.

fugelere (AO) = fuglere

fugeleswȳse f. _larkspur_, WW 298^24.

fugelhwata m. _augur_, WW 140^5.

fugellīm m. _bird-lime_, OEG 3105.

fugelnett n. _bird net_, WW 277^16.

fugelnoð, fugeloð = fugoloð

fugeltimber n. _young bird_, #Ph# 236.

fugeltrēo n. _perch (of a bird)_.

fugelweohlere m. _augur_, WW 108^12. [wiglere]

fuglere m. ‘_fowler_,’ _AO_.

fuglesbēan f. _vetch_, #Gl#.

fuglian _to catch birds_, _ÆGr_. [‘_fowl_’]

fuglung f. _bird-catching_, WW.

fugol m. gs. fugles _‘fowl,’ bird_, _B, Mt_; CP; Mdf.

fugol-, see also fugel-.

fugolcynn n. _bird-tribe_, _Æ_. [‘_fowlkin_’]

fugoldæg (u^2) m. _feast-day_, TC 460^20.

fugolhǣlsere m. _augur_.

fugoloð m. _bird-catching, fowling_, Æ.

fugolwylle _swarming with birds_, BH 30^10. [weallan]

fugul- = fugel-, fugol-

fuhl- = fugl-

fūht _damp, moist_. [_Ger._ feucht]

fūhtian _to be moist_, NC 290.

fuhton pret. pl. of feohtan.

ful I. n. _beaker, cup_, Æ. II. == full

fūl I. _‘foul,’ unclean, impure, vile, corrupt, rotten_, _Æ, Bl, Cp, Cr,
WW_; CP. f. bēam _black alder_, #Lcd# 29b: _guilty_, LL. II. n. _filth,
foulness, impurity, crime, offence_, _El, OET_. [‘_foul_’]

fulbeorht _very bright, resplendent_, CP 87^23.

fulbrecan^4 _to violate_, LL 280[2,2].

fuldōn anv. _to satisfy_, RB 70^21.

fūle adv. _foully_.

fulēode pret. 3 sg. of fullgān.

fūletrēo n. _black alder_, Cp 430#a#.

fulfæstnian _to ratify fully_, #Chr# 675#e#.

fulfaran^6 _to travel_, LL 383[56].

fulfealdan^7 ‘_explicare_,’ #ÆGr# 138^9.

fulgeare _quite well_, ÆL 3^456. [gearwe]

fulgōd _very good_, ÆL 6^124.

fulgon pret. pl. of fēolan.

fulhār _completely grey, very hoary_, WW 380^13.

fulhealden _contented_, WW 211^30.

fulht- = fulwiht-

fūlian _to be or become foul, decay, rot_, _AO, Ps_.

full I. adj. (w. g.) _‘full’ filled, complete, perfect, entire, utter_,
_Gen, Ps, Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP: _swelling, plump_, #Lcd#. be fullan _fully,
perfectly, completely_. II. adv. _very, fully, entirely, completely,
thoroughly_, _Bo, Ps_. f. nēah _almost, very nearly_. III. = ful

full- v. also ful-.

fulla m. _assembly_? Ct.

fullǣst (ā, ē; fylst) m. _help, support_, _Ex_. [‘_filst_’]

±fullǣstan (ē) w. d. _to help, support_, _AO_; Lk. [‘_filst_’]

+fullan = +fyllan

fullberstan^3 _to burst completely_, W 267^18.

fullbētan _to make full amends_.

fullblīðe _very glad_.

fullboren _completely born_, CP 367^18: _of noble birth_.

fullbryce m. _complete breach of the peace_, LL.

fullclǣne _very pure_, AS 29^12.

fullcræftig _very efficient, virtuous_.

fullcūð _notorious, famous_.

-fulle v. sin-f.

fullendian _to complete_, _BH_. [‘_fullend_’]

fullere m. _‘fuller,’ bleacher_, _Mk_.

fullest == fullǣst

fullflēon^2 _to take to flight, escape completely_.

fullforðian _to fulfil_, NC 291.

fullfremed _perfect_, CP. adv. -līce _fully, perfectly, completely_,
_Bl_.

fullfremednes f. _perfection_, _BH_; CP. [‘_fullfremedness_’]

±full-fremman, -fremian _to fulfil, perfect, practise, do fully,
complete_, _Bo_; CP. [‘_fullfreme_’]

fullfyligan _to follow, obey_, W 95^19: ‘_persequi_,’ #EPs# 7^6.

fullfyllan ‘_complere_,’ _ÆGr_ 153^1. [‘_fulfil_’]

full-gān pret. 3 sg. -ēode anv., -gangan^7 _to accomplish, fulfil,
perform, carry out_, Æ: _follow, imitate, obey_: _help_, AO.

fullgearwian _to finish, complete_, GD 126^2.

fullgedrifen (w. g.) _driven full of_.

fullgeorne _very eagerly_, CP 255^22.

fullgewēpned _fully armed_, #Chr#.

fullgrōwan^7 _to grow to perfection, flourish_, CP 67^23.

fullhāl _thoroughly well_, GD 248^1.

fullian I. _to fulfil, complete, perfect_. II. (_Jn_) = fulwian

fullic _full_, #Chr# 785#c#?: ‘_catholicus_,’ CHy 15. adv. -līce
_entirety, fully, perfectly, completely_, _A, BH_; Æ.

fūllic _foul, unclean, objectionable, shameful, base_, #Lcd#, W. adv.
-līce.

fulligan = fulwian

fullmannod _fully peopled_, #Bo# 40^17.

full-medeme _excellent, perfect_, GD. adv. -medomlīce, GD 331^13.

fullnes f. _fullness_.

fūllnes = fūlnes

fulloc _final or definite agreement_? LL 385.

fulloft adv. _very often_, CP.

fullðungen (ful-) _full-grown_, RB 133^1.

fullðungennes f. _full development_, MFH 160.

fulluht == fulwiht

fullunga adv. _fully_.

fullwēpnod _fully armed_, #Chr# 1070#e#.

fullwer m. _complete_ ‘wer,’ _full atonement_, #Rd# 24^14?

fullwyrcan _to complete, fulfil_.

fulmægen n. _great power_, W 186^14.

fulnēah I. adj. _very near_. II. adv. _very nearly, almost_, CP.

fūlnes f. _foulness, filthy smell_.

fūlon rare pret. pl. of fēolan.

fulraðe adv. _very quickly_, AO.

fulrīpod _mature_, RB 139^9.

fūlstincende _foul-stinking_.

fulsumnes f. _abundance_, #EPs# 48^7.

fultēam = fultum

fultem- (CP), fultom- = fultum-

fultrūwian _to confide in_, #Bo# 60^23.

fultum (ēa) m. _help, support, protection_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP: _forces,
army_, AO. [‘_fultum_’]

+fultuma m. _helper_, #SPs# 18^16.

±fultum-an, -ian _to help, support, assist_, Æ, CP: (†) _be propitious
to, overlook_.

±fultumend, fultumiend m. _helper, fellow-worker_.

fultumlēas _without help_, AO 56^21.

fulwa m. _fuller_, MH 26^26.

fulwearm _entirely warm_, CP 447^5.

fulwere m. _baptizer, baptist_.

fulwērig _very tired_, MFH 160.

±fulwian _to baptize_, _BH, MH_; AO, CP. [‘_full_’]

fulwiht, fulluht (_Mt_) mfn. _baptism, Christianity_, _Mt_; AO, CP.
[‘_fullought_’]

+fulwiht-an, -ian _to baptize_, #Chr#, NG.

fulwihtbæð n. _baptismal bath, font_, Æ (fulluht-).

fulwihtbēna m. ‘_competitor, amicus vel rogator baptismi_,’ WW 207^16.

fulwihtere m. _baptizer_: _the Baptist_.

fulwihtfæder m. _baptismal father, godfather, baptizer_, #Bl# 205^17.

fulwihthād m. _baptismal order or vow_, #Bl# 109^28.

fulwihtnama m. _baptismal name, Christian name_.

+fulwihtnian (fulhtn-) _to baptize_, NC 291.

fulwihtstōw f. _baptistry_, #Bl# 140^20.

fulwihttīd f. _time of baptism_, #Men# 11.

fulwihtðēaw m. _rite of baptism_, #Met# 1^33.

fulwihtðēnung (-uht) f. _baptismal service_, W 38^9.

fulwihtwæter n. _laver of baptism_, NC 291.

fulwihtwere m. _baptist_, #Bl# 161^6.

fulwuht = fulwiht

funde wk. pret. 3 sg., funden pp. of findan.

-fundelnes, -fundennes v. on-f.

fundian (w. of, tō) _to tend to, wish for, strive after, go, set out, go
forward, hasten_, _Æ, B, Cr, Gu_; CP. [‘_found_’]

fundon pret. pl. of findan.

fundung f. _setting forth, departure_, #Chr# 1106.

fūra v. furh.

furh f. gs. fūre, ds. fyrh, furh, gp. fūra _‘furrow,’ trench_, _BC,
Bo_; Æ.

furhwudu m. _pine_, Cp 420#p#.

±fūrian _to furrow_, OEG.

furlang n. _length of furrow, furlong_. [furh, lang]

furðan, furðon = furðum

furðerlucor = furðorlīcor

furðor adv. (of place and time) _‘further,’ more distant, forwards,
later_, _Æ, Chr_: _more_: _superior_. f. dōn _to promote_, _A_.

furðorlīcor (e^2, u^3) cp. adv. _more perfectly_.

furðra cp. adj. _‘further’ greater, superior_, _Jn_.

furðum (-an, -on) adv. _even, exactly, quite, already, just as, at
first_, _Bl, Mt_; AO, CP: _further, previously_. syððan f. _just as soon
as_. [‘_forthen_’]

furðumlic _luxurious, indulging_, AO 50^30.

furður == furðor

furuh = furh

fūs _striving forward, eager for, ready for, inclined to, willing,
prompt_, _B_; Æ: _expectant, brave, noble_: _ready to depart, dying_.
[‘_fous_’]

fūse = fūslīce

fūslēoð † n. _death-song, dirge_.

fūslic _ready to start_: _excellent_. adv. -līce _readily, gladly_.

fūsnes f. _quickness_, EHy 6^25.

fustra? ‘_focus_,’ ‘_ignis_,’ v. OEG 1428.

fȳf- = fīf-

fyhfang = feohfang

fyht- = feoht-

fȳhtan (ī) _to moisten_, OEG. [fūht]

fyl = fiell

±fȳlan _to befoul, defile, pollute_, Æ.

+fylce n. _band of men, troop, army, host_, CP. [folc]

±fylcian _to marshal troops_. [folc]

fyld m. ‘_volumen_,’ ‘_ruga_,’ OEG.

fyldstōl = fealdestōl

±fylgan w. d. or a. _to follow, pursue_, Æ, CP: _persecute_: _follow
out, observe, obey_.

fylgend m. _follower, observer_, BH 472^7.

fylgestre f. _female follower_, OEG 1228.

fylgian = fylgan

fylging f. I. _following_, DR. II. (æ) _harrowing, harrow_. [fealg]

fylian, fyligan = fylgan

fyligendlic _that can or ought to be imitated_, CM 803.

fylignes f. _following, practice_, BH 160^23.

fyll = (1) fyllu; (2) fiell  [[(1) under “fyllo”]]

±fyllan I. _to _‘fill_,’ fill up, replenish, satisfy_, _An, Gen, Ps_; Æ:
_complete, fulfil_, _Az_. [full] II. ± (æ, e; = ie) wv. _to cause to
fall, strike down_, ‘_fell,’ cut down_, _Ps, Rd_. +fylled wdg. _bereft_:
_throw down, defeat, destroy, kill_, _BH, Cr, Ps_: _tumble_: _cause to
stumble_, MtR.

fyllað m. _filling, filling up_, #Gen# 1513.

+fyllednes (i) f. _fulness, completion, fulfilment_, Æ.

-fyllen (fylen) v. mōnað-f.  [[under “mōnaðfylen”]]

fyllend = fylgend

+fyllendlic _filling, expletive_, #ÆGr# 261^5.

fyllesēoc _epileptic_.

fyllesēocnes f. _epilepsy_, #Lcd# 1·164^9.

fylleðflōd m. _high tide_, #Gl#.

fyllewærc n. _epilepsy_, #Lcd# 65a.

fylling f. _filling, completion_, NC 291.

+fyllingtīd f. _compline_, WW 207^44n.

±fyllnes f. _fulness, plenitude, satiety_: _supplement_: _completion,
fulfilment_.

fyllo, fyllu f. _fulness (of food)_, _‘fill,’ feast, satiety_, _AO, B_;
CP: _impregnation_.

fylmen = filmen

fylnes I. (±) f. _fall, stumbling-block, offence_, NG: (+)
_transmigration_, MtL 1^12. II. = fyllnes

fȳlnes = fūlnes

fylst I. fm. _help, aid_, _Mt_; Æ, AO. II. pres. 2 sg. of feallan. III.
pres. 2 sg. of fyllan.

+fylsta m. _helper_, Æ.

±fylstan (w. d.) _to aid, support, help, protect_, Æ, AO. [= fullæstan]
  [[headword spelled “fullǣstan”]]

±fylstend m. _helper_, Æ, #BRPs#.

fylt pres. 3 sg. of fealdan.

fylð I. pres. 3 sg. of fyllan. II. pres. 3 sg. of feallan.

fȳlð f. _‘filth,’ uncleanness, impurity_, _Mt, Sc, W_. [fūl]

fylwērig _faint to death_, B 963. [fiell]

fyn- = fin-

fȳnd = fēond

+fȳnd = +fīend

fyndele m. _invention, devising_, _Sc_. [‘_findal_’]

fyne m? n? _moisture, mould_, WW 183^19.

fynegian = fynigian

fynig (i) _mouldy_, _Æ_. [‘_fenny_’]

fynigian (e^2) _to become mouldy_, _LL_. [‘_finew_’]

fyr v. feorr.

fȳr (ī) n. ‘_fire_,’ _Ex, G, VPs_; Æ, AO, CP: _a fire_, _Gen_.

fȳran I. = fēran. II. _to cut a furrow_, OEG 2492n: _castrate_.

fȳras = fīras

fȳrbǣre _fire-bearing, fiery_, OEG.

fȳrbæð † n. _fire-bath, hell-fire_.

fȳrbend m. _bar forged in the fire_, B 722.

fȳrbēta m. _fireman, stoker_, WW.

fȳrbryne m. _conflagration_, AO 252^20.

fyrclian (ȳ?) _to flash, flicker_, #Chr# 1106.

fȳrclomm m. _band forged in the fire_, #Sat# 39.

fȳrcrūce f. _crucible_, Cp 963#c#.

fȳrcynn n. _fire_, AO 252^20#c#.

fyrd = fierd

fyrdcræft m. _warfare_.

fyrdend _enrolled for military service_, ÆL 25^383.

fyrdesne m. _warrior_, BH 148^8.

fyrdfæreld n. fyrdfaru f. _going to war, military service_, LL.

fyrdgeatewe fp. _war-gear_, #Run# 27.

fyrdgemaca m. _fellow-soldier_, Æ.

fyrdgestealla † m. _comrade in arms_.

fyrdgetrum † n. _band of warriors_.

fyrdham m. _corslet_, B 1504.

fyrdhrægl n. _corslet_, B 1527.

fyrdhwæt † _warlike, brave_.

fyrdian (ie) _to go on an expedition_, #Chr#.

fyrdlāf f. _remnant of an army_, ÆL 25^377.

fyrdlēas (ie) _without an army_, #Chr# 894#a#.

fyrdlēoð † n. _war-song_.

fyrdlic _martial_, Æ.

fyrdmann m. _warrior_, #Bo#.

fyrdnoð (e) m. _liability to military service_, BC 3·71^7.

fȳrdraca m. _fire-spewing dragon_, _B_ 2689. [‘_firedrake_’]

fyrdrian wv. _to serve in the army, go on active service_, ÆL 28^11.

fyrdrinc † (e) m. _warrior, soldier_.

fyrdsceorp n. _armour_, #Rd# 15^13.

fyrdscip n. _battle-ship_, LL.

fyrdsearu † n. _accoutrements_.

fyrdsōcn f. _military service_, Ct.

fyrdstemn m. _body of soldiers who serve for a fixed term, army-corps_,
#Chr# 921.

fyrdtīber n. _military sacrifice_? (Swt), WW 418^22; A 15·187.

fyrdtruma m. _martial band, army_, ÆH 1·442^34.

fyrdung (eo, i) f. _military expedition, armament_, _LL_; Æ: _camp_:
_fine for evading military service_, LL. [‘_ferding_’]

fyrdwǣn (i) m. _military carriage_? EC 250^22.

fyrdweard f. _military watch_, LL 444[1].

fyrdwerod n. _host, army_, WW 399^30.

fyrdwīc n. _camp_, Æ.

fyrdwīsa m. _chieftain_, #Cra# 77.

fyrdwīse f. _military style_, #Nar# 9^28.

fyrdwīte n. _fine for evading military service_.

fyrdwyrðe _distinguished in war_, B 1316.

-fyrede v. twi-, ðri-f.

fyren == firen

fȳren I. _of fire, fiery_, AO, CP: _on fire, burning, flaming_. II.
_fire_, #CPs#.

fȳrenful _fiery_, #LPs#, W.

fyrengāt (WW 423^11) = firgengāt

fȳrentācen n. _fiery sign_, MFH 131^12.

fȳrentācnian ‘_compellere_’ (?) RHy 6^21.

fȳrenðecele f. _firebrand_, BH 476^15.

fyres = fyrs

fyrest = fyrst, fyrmest superl. adj.

fyrewyt = fyrwit

fȳrfeaxen _fiery-haired_, WW.

fȳrfōda (ī) m. _fuel, twigs for burning_, OEG 7^88.

fȳrgearwunga fp. _materials for a fire_, WW 401^9.

fȳrgebeorh n. _firescreen_? _protection from fire_? LL 455[17].

fȳrgebræc n. _crackling of fire_, #Gen# 2560.

fyrgen == firgen

fȳrgnāst m. _spark of fire_, #An# 1548. [_ON._ gneisti]

fyrh v. furh.

fȳrhāt _hot as fire, burning, ardent_, _El_. [‘_firehot_’]

fȳrheard _hardened by fire_, B 305.

±fyrht I. _afraid, timid_. [forht] II. = freht

fyrht-an, -ian (fryht-, N) _to fear, tremble_, _DR_: (±) _frighten,
terrify_, _BH_. [‘_fright_,’ vb.]

fyrhtnes f. _fear_, AO.

fyrhto, fyrhtu (fryht-, N) f. _‘fright,’ fear, dread, trembling_, _Ps,
VHy_; Æ, AO, CP: _horrible sight_. [forht]

fyrhð == ferhð

±fyrhðe n., fyr(h)ð f. _wooded country_? _Ct_. [‘_frith_’]

fȳrhūs n. _‘caminatum,’ house with a fireplace in it_? _WW_.
[‘_firehouse_’]

fȳrhwēolod v. fēowerhwēolod.

fyrian (B 378) = ferian

fȳrian I. _to supply with firing_, _LL_. [‘_fire_’ vb.] II. (±) _to cut
a furrow_. [furh]

fyrlen I. (eo, e) _far off, distant, remote_, Æ. II. n. _distance_, Æ.

fȳrlēoht n. _gleam of fire_, B 1516. [‘_firelight_’]

fȳrlēoma m. _gleam of fire_, #Sat# 128.

fȳrlīce = fǣrlīce

fȳrloca m. _fiery prison_, #Sat# 58.

fyrm = feorm

fȳrmǣl m. _mark burnt in by fire_, #An# 1136.

fyrmest (o) superl. of forma I. _‘foremost,’ first_, _Æ, CP, Lcd_: _most
prominent, chief, best_, _El, Mt_. II. adv. _first of all, in the first
place, at first, most, especially, very well, best_.

fyrmð f. _harbouring, entertainment_, LL: _cleansing, washing_. [feorm]

fyrn I. (i) adj. _former, ancient_, _Rd_. II. adv. (±) _formerly, of
old, long ago, once_, ÆL. [‘_fern_’]

±fyrndagas mp. _days of yore_, ÆL. frðd fyrndagum _old, aged_.

fyrnful = firenful

fyrngēar † np. _former years_, _Gn, Ps_. [‘_fernyear_’]

fyrngēara † adv. _formerly, of old_.

fyrn-geflit † n. nap. -geflitu _former quarrel, old strife_.

fyrngeflita m. _old-standing enemy_, #Pa# 34.

fyrngemynd n. _ancient history_, #El# 327.

fyrngesceap n. _ancient decree_, #Ph# 360.

fyrngesetu ‡ np. _former seat, habitation_.

fyrngestrēon n. _ancient treasure_, #Sol# 32.

fyrngeweorc † n. _former, ancient work_.

fyrngewinn n. _primeval struggle_, B 1689.

fyrngewrit † n. _old writings, scripture_.

fyrngewyrht n. _former work, fate_, #Gu# 944.

fyrngidd n. _ancient prophecy_, #El# 542.

fyrnian = firenian

fyrnlic _former, of times past_, Æ.

fyrnmann m. _man of old times_, B 2761.

+fyrnnes f. _antiquity_, NC 294.

fyrnsægen f. _old saying, ancient tradition_, #An# 1491.

fyrnsceaða m. _devil_, #An# 1348.

fyrnstrēamas † mp. _ocean_.

fyrnsynn f. _sin of old times_, #Jul# 347.

fyrnum = firenum

fyrnweorc † n. _work of old, creation_.

fyrnwita (eo^2) † m. _sage, counsellor_.

fȳr-panne, -ponne f. _‘fire-pan,’ brazier_, _Bl, MH, WW_.

fyrr v. feorr.

fȳrrace (fērrece) f. _fire-rake_, WW 273^6.

fyrran = feorran

fyrs I. m. _‘furze,’ gorse, bramble_, _Bo, WW_. II. n. = fers

fȳrscofl f. ‘_fire-shovel_,’ _WW_ 358^16.

fyrsian = feorsian

fȳrsmeortende v. smeortan.

fyrsn = fiersn

fȳrspearca m. _fire-spark_.

fyrst I. ‘_first_,’ _Chr, Ex_: _foremost, principal, chief_, _LL_. II.
adv. _in the first place, firstly, at first, originally_, _Ct_. III. (Æ)
= first I. and II.

+fyrst n. _frost_, LL 454[11].

fyrst- = forst-, first-

fȳrstān m. _‘firestone,’ stone used for striking fire, flint_, _WW_.

fȳrsweart _black with smoke_, #Cr# 984.

fȳrtang f. ‘_(fire-)tongs_,’ A 9·263.

fȳrtorr m. _beacon, lighthouse_, WW.

fȳrðling = fēorðling

fȳrðolle f? _furnace, stage on which martyrs were burned_, OEG.

±fyrðran (#Gl#, AO), fyrðian (_Bo_; Æ) _to ‘further,’ urge on, advance,
promote, benefit_.

fyrðringnes f., fyrðrung (_Lcd_; W) f. _furtherance, promotion_.
[‘_furthering_’]

fyrwet = fyrwit

fyrwetful _curious, anxious_.

fyrwetgeorn _curious, anxious, inquisitive_. adv. -līce (GD 174^28).

fyrwetgeornes f. _curiosity_, #Bl# 69^22.

fyrwit I. n. _curiosity, yearning_, Æ. II. adj. _curious, inquisitive_.

fyrwitnes f. _curiosity_, Æ.

fȳrwylm m. _wave of fire_, B 2672.

±fȳsan _to send forth, impel, stimulate_: _drive away, put to flight,
banish_: (usu. reflex.) _hasten, prepare oneself_, _An, Gen_. [‘_fuse_’]

fȳsian (ē) _to drive away_, _LL, W_. [‘_feeze_’]

fȳst (ē) f. ‘_fist_,’ _Æ, OET_; CP.

fȳstgebēat n. _blow with the fist_, CP 315.

+fȳstlian _to strike with the fist_, #Sc# 7^14.

fȳstslægen _struck with the fist_, WW 396^33.

fyðer- = fiðer-, fēower-

fyðera, fyðeras, fyð(e)ru, nap. of fiðere.

fyx = fisc

fyxe (OET) f. _she-fox, vixen_.

fyxen (i) I. f. _she-fox, vixen_. II. adj. _of a fox_.

fyxenhȳd (i) f. _she-fox’s skin_.




=G=


gā imperat. and pres. 1 sg. ind. of gān.

gab- (#Gl#) = gaf

gabote (u^2) f. _side-dish_, #EGl#. [_L._ gabata]

gād I. † n. _lack, want, need, desire_. [_Goth._ gaidw] II. f. _‘goad,’
point, arrow-head, spear-head_, _Cp, Sol_.

±gada m. _comrade, companion_, ÆL. [_Ger._ gatte]

gaderian (Æ) = gadrian

±gaderscipe (æ) m. _matrimony_, OEG.

gadertang _continuous, united_.

gadertangnes (æ) f. _continuation_.

±gaderung (æ) f. _gathering together_: ‘_gathering_,’ _Lcd_: _union_,
BH: _assembly_, _A, Jn_.

+gaderwyrhtan np. _assembled workmen_, ÆL 6·186.

gād-īren (LL 455, 15), -īsen n. _goad_.

gador = geador

±gadori(ge)an = gadrian

±gadorwist f. _companionship_, WW.

±gadrian (æ) _to ‘gather,’ unite_: (+) (refl.) _assemble_, _Chr_:
_collect, store up_, _An, G, Ps_; Æ, CP: _pluck (flowers, etc.)_:
_compile_: (+) _associate (with)_: (+) _concentrate (thoughts)_, #Bo#.
[geador]

gǣ = gēa

gǣc = gēac

gæd n. _society, fellowship_, #Sol# 449.

gǣd = gād I.

gædeling † m. _kinsman, fellow, companion in arms, comrade_, _B, Da_.
[‘_gadling_’]

gæder- = gader-

gædr- = gadr-

gæf = geaf pret. 3 sg. of giefan.

gæfe = giefu

gæfel I. = geafl I. II. (_MtL_) = gafol

gǣfon = gēafon pret. pl. of giefan.

-gǣgan v. for-, ofer-g.

gæglbǣrnes = gagolbǣrnes

gǣlan _to hinder, impede, keep in suspense_, CP: (intr.) _linger,
delay_. [gāl]

gæleð pres. 3 sg. of galan.

gǣling f. _delay_, CP 39^1.

gǣlnes = gālnes

gǣlsa (ē) m., gǣls? (OEG 611) f. _pride, wantonness, luxury_, Æ, W:
_(worldly) care_, MtL 13^22: _a greedy person_. [gāl]

gǣlslic ‘_luxuriosus_,’ NC 291.

gælð pres. 3 sg. of galan.

gæmnian = gamenian

gǣn- = gēan-

-gǣnan v. tō-g.

+gænge = +genge

gǣp = gēap

gær- = gear-, græ-

gǣr == gēar

gǣred _wedge-shaped_, BC 3·251´. [gār]

-gǣrede v. twi-, ðri-g.

gærs (græs) n. _‘grass,’ blade (of grass)_, _herb, young corn, hay,
plant_, _An, Cp, CP_; Æ.

gærsama = gærsuma  [[under “gærsum”]]

gærsbedd n. _(grass-bed), grave_, #PPs# 102^15.

gærscīð m. _blade of grass_, AO 38^11.

gærsgrēne _grass-green_, WW 199^24.

gærs-hoppa m., -hoppe (e^1) f. _‘grasshopper,’ locust_, _MtR_ (græs-),
_Ps, VPs_ (e).

gærsstapa = gærstapa

gærsswȳn n. _pasturage-swine_, LL 445[2].

gærstapa m. _grasshopper, locust_, Æ, AO.

gærstūn m. _grass-enclosure, meadow_, _LL_. [‘_garston_’]

gærstūndīc m. _meadow-dike_, Ct.

gærsum mn., gærsuma f. _jewel, costly gift, treasure, riches_, _Chr_.
[‘_gersum_’]

gærswyrt f. _‘herba,’ grass_, #APs# 36^2.

gærsyrð f. _pasturage in return for ploughing, labour_, LL 447, 4, lc.
[‘_grassearth_’]

gǣsne (ē, ēa) w. g. or on. _deprived of, wanting, destitute, barren,
sterile_, _An, Cr_: _dead_. [‘_geason_’]

gæst (a, e, i, ie, y) m. (nap. gastas) _stranger_, _MtL_ (e), _Rd_:
‘_guest_,’ _B, Gen_ (ie); RB (y): (†) _enemy_.

gǣst I. m. == gāst. II. pres. 2 sg. of gān.

gæstærn (e^1, y^1, e^2) n. _guest-chamber_: _inn_.

gǣstan _to frighten_, _Jul_ 17. [‘_gast_’]

gæsthof n. _guest-house_, #Cr# 821.

gæsthūs (ie) n. _‘guest-house,’ guest-chamber, inn_, _Mk_. [_Ger._
gasthaus]

gæstlic † _hospitable_: _inhospitable, dreary_? #Wa# 73.

gæstlīðe (i^1) _hospitable_.

gæstlīðnes f. _hospitality_: _shelter, home_, ANS 122·248.

gæstmægen (i^1) n. _band of guests_? #Gen# 2494.

gæstsele (e, y) † m. _guest-hall_.

gǣsð = gāst

gæt = geat

gǣt nap. of gāt.

gǣtan = gēatan

gǣten _of or belonging to a goat_.

gǣð pres. 3 sg. of gān.

gaf = geaf pret. 3 sg. of giefan.

gafel = gafol

gafelian _to rent (land)_, _Ct_. [‘_gavel_’]

gafellic (WW 403^21) = gafollic

gafelro(n)d (WW 204^33) = gafolrand

gafeluc m. _spear, javelin_, _OEG, WW_; ÆL. [‘_gavelock_’]

gaffetung f. _scoffing, mocking_, Æ.

gafol (æ, ea^1; e, u^2) I. n. gs. gafles _tribute, tax, duty_, _AO, Gl,
MtL_ (æ): _interest, profit, rent_, _Gl_ (æ), _Mt_; Æ. [giefan] II. f.
_fork_, OET 463 (v. A 36·60). [‘_gavel_’]

gafolbære m. _barley paid as rent_, TC 145^2.

gafolgerēfa (æ^1, e^2) m. _taxgatherer_, MtR.

gafolgielda (AO) (i^3, y^3) m. _tributary, tenant, debtor_.

gafolgyld n. _‘fiscus,’ revenue_? GPH 395.

gafolgyldere m. _tributary_, Æ.

gafolheord f. _taxable swarm (of bees)_, LL 448[5].

gafolhwītel m. _tribute-blanket, a legal tender instead of coin for the
rent of a hide of land_, LL 108[44,1].

gafolland n. _leased land, land let for rent or services_, LL 126[2].

gafollic _fiscal_, OEG 6^20.

gafolmǣd f. _meadow which was mown as part of the rent_, TC 145^3.

gafolmanung (ea^1, o^3) f. _place of tribute or custom_, MkR 2^14.

gafolpenig m. _tribute-penny_, LL 446.

gafolrǣden f. _tribute, rent_, LL.

gafolrand m. _compasses_. [gafol II. +rind? A 36·59]

gafolswān m. _swine-herd who paid rent in kind for permission to
depasture his stock_, LL 448[6].

gafoltīning f. _fencing-wood given as part of the rent_, TC 145^8.

gafolwydu m. _firewood supplied as part of the rent_, TC 145^6.

gafolyrð f. _land subject to tribute, rented land_, LL 447.

±gafsprǣc f. _foolish speech, scurrility_, ÆL.

gaful = gafol

gagātes, gagātstān (WW 148^5) m. _agate, jet_, _BH_. [‘_gagate_’]

gagel m? _‘gale,’ bog-myrtle_, _Lcd_; Mdf.

gagelcroppan mpl. _tufts of gale_, #Lcd# 33a.

gagelle, gagolle f. = gagel

gagol = (1) gāl; (2) gagel

gagolbǣrnes (gægl-) f. _wantonness_, CP.

gagulswillan _to gargle_, #Gl#.

gāl I. n. _lust, luxury, wantonness, folly, levity_. II. adj. _gay,
light, wanton_, _Bo, BH_: _proud, wicked_. [‘_gole_’]

±galan^6 _to sing, call, cry, scream_, _B, Met_: _sing charms, practice
incantation_. [‘_gale_’]

galder- = galdor-

galdor (ea) n. _magic song, incantation, spell, enchantment_, Æ.

galdorcræft m. _occult art, incantation, magic_.

galdorcræftiga m. _wizard_, LL 38[30].

galdorcwide m. _incantation_, #Rd# 49^7.

galdorgalend _using enchantments_, WW.

galdorgalere m. _wizard_, WW 346^15.

galdorlēoð n. _incantation_.

galdorsang m. _incantation_, W 253^10.

galdorword n. _magic word_, #Rim# 24.

galdre m. _wizard, magician_.

galdrigge f. _enchantress_, #Gl#.

galdru nap. of galdor.

galend m. _enchanter_, #VPs#.

galere m. _wizard, snake-charmer_, WW.

gālferhð _wanton, licentious_, #Jud# 62.

gālfrēols m. _revel, ‘lupercalia,’_ OEG.

gālful _wanton, lustful, luxurious_. adv. -līce.

galg- = gealg-

gālian _to be wanton_, #Sc# 87^10.

Galilēisc _Galilean_.

galla (#VPs#; DR) = gealla

gallac = galloc

Galleas, Gallias mp. _Gauls, Franks, French_.

galled = gealled

gāllic _lustful_, _BH, Bo_; Æ. [‘_golelich_’]

Gallie = Galleas

Gallisc _Gaulish, French_.

galloc (u^2) m. _comfrey, gall-apple_.

gālmōd _wanton, licentious_, #Jud# 256.

gālnes f. _frivolity, wantonness, lust_, _Sc_; Æ. [‘_goleness_’]

gālscipe m. _excess, luxury, lasciviousness, wantonness_, _Æ_: _pride_.
[‘_goleship_’]

gālsere m. _licentious person_, W 72^6.

gālsmǣre _frivolous, facetious, jocose_, RB 30^8. [v. ‘_smere_’]

galung f. _incantation_, OEG 4940. [galan]

Galwalas mp. _Gauls, Frenchmen_: _France_.

gambe (o) † f. _tribute_.

gamel == gamol

gamelic = gamenlic

gamen (o) n. _sport, joy, mirth, pastime_, _‘game,’ amusement_, _B, Bo_;
Æ, CP.

gamenian _to pun, play, joke_, _Æ, Sc_. [‘_game_’]

gamenlic _belonging to games, theatrical_, OEG. adv. -līce _artfully_,
_Æ_. [‘_gamely_’]

gamenung f. _jesting, pastime_.

gamenwāðu (o^1) f. _merry journey_, B 854.

gamenwudu (o^1) † m. _mirthful wood, harp_.

gamnian = gamenian

gamol † _old, aged, hoary, ancient_. [ge-, mǣl]

gamolfeax † _grey-haired_.

gamolferhð _old, aged_, #Gen# 2867.

gān pret. 3 sg. of gīnan.

±gān pret. 3 sg. ēode, anv. _to ‘go’ (‘i-go’), move, proceed, advance,
traverse, walk_, _Æ, BH, G_; CP: _happen, turn out, take place_, _Lk_:
(+) _gain, conquer, occupy, overrun_, AO: (+) _observe, practice,
exercise, effect_.

gandra m. _gander_, _ÆGr_; Ct.

ganet = ganot

gang I. (e, eo, o, u) m. _going, journey, progress, track, footprint_,
_B, Lcd, RB_; Æ: _flow, stream, way, passage, course, path, bed_, _AO,
Bl_: _drain, privy_, _Æ_: (in pl.) _platform, stage_, GPH 394.
[‘_gang_,’ ‘_gong_’] II. imperat. and pret. sg. of gangan.

+gang n. _occurrence_, WW 394^9; _passage (lapse) of time_, GD 179^10.

gangan^7 (_B, Bl_) pret. geng (eo, a) = gān

gangdæg m. _one of the three processional days before Ascension day,
Rogation day_, _Chr_. [‘_gangdays_’]

gangehere = ganghere

gangelwæfre = gangewæfre  [[under “gangewifre”]]

gangern n. _privy_, WW 184^15. [ærn]

gangewifre (eo^1, o^1; æ^2; æ^3) f. _(a weaver as he goes), spider_.

ganggeteld n. _portable tent_, WW 187^3.

ganghere m. _army of foot-soldiers_, AO 154^24.

gang-pytt m., -setl n., -stōl m., -tūn m. (Æ) _privy_.

gangweg m. _thoroughfare_, _WW_. [‘_gangway_’]

gangwuce f. _Rogation week, the week of holy Thursday_, _Mk_.
[‘_gangweek_’]

gānian _to yawn, gape, open_, _Ps_; #Gl#. [‘_gane_’]

ganot m. _‘gannet,’ sea-bird, water-fowl_, _B, Chr_. ganotes bæð _the
sea_.

ganra = gandra

gānung f. _yawning_, WW 162^37.

-gapian v. ofer-g.

gār † I. m. _‘spear,’ dart, javelin_, _B, PPs_. [‘_gare_’]
II. _tempest_? #Gen# 316. III. = gāra (Mdf).

gāra m. _corner, point of land, cape, promontory_, _AO_. [gār; ‘_gore_’]

gārbēam m. _spear-shaft_, #Ex# 246.

gārberend † m. _warrior_.

gārcēne _bold in fight_, B 1958.

gārclife f. _agrimony_, #Lcd#.

gārcwealm m. _death by the spear_, B 2043.

gare = gearo

gārfaru † f. _warlike expedition_.

gārgetrum _armed company_, #Cr# 673.

gārgewinn † n. _fight with spears, battle_.

gārhēap m. _band of warriors_, #Ex# 321.

gārholt n. _shafted spear_, B 1835.

gārlēac n. ‘_garlic_,’ _Lcd_; Æ.

gārmitting f. _battle_, †#Chr# 937.

gārnīð m. _conflict, war_, #GnE# 128.

gārrǣs m. _battle_, #Ma# 32.

gārsecg m. _ocean, sea_, AO.

gārtorn m. _fighting rage_, #Sol# 145.

gār-ðracu f. ds. -ðræce _battle_, #El# 1186.

gārðrīst † _bold, daring_.

garuwe = gearwe

gār-wiga †, -wīgend ‡ m. _spearman, warrior_.

gārwudu m. _spear-shaft, lance_, #Ex# 325.

gāsrīc m. _savage person_? #Rune Casket#.

gast == gæst

gāst (ǣ) m. _breath_, _Ps, VPs_: _soul, spirit, life_, _Gen, Ex, Mt_;
CP: _good or bad spirit, angel, demon_, Æ; _BH, Mt_: _Holy Ghost_, _A,
Jn, VPs_: _man, human being_, _Gu_. [‘_ghost_’]

gāstan _to meditate_? AS 3^1.

gāstberend (æ) † m. _living soul, man_.

gāstbona m. _soul-slayer, the Devil_, B 177.

gāstbrūcende _practising in the spirit_, Æ.

gāstcofa m. _breast_, #Leas# 13.

gāstcund (ǣ) _spiritual_, #Gu# 743.

gāstcwalu (ǣ) f. _torment, pains of hell_, #Gu# 651.

gāstcyning m. _soul’s king, God_, #Gen# 2883.

gāstedom (ǣ) _spirituality_, MFH 112.

gāstgedāl † n. _death_.

gāstgehygd † n. _thought_.

gāstgemynd (ǣ) n. _thought_, #Gu# 574.

gāstgenīðla (ǣ) m. _devil_, #Jul# 245.

gāstgerȳne † n. _spiritual mystery_: _thought, consideration_.

gāstgewinn (ǣ) ‡ n. _soul-torment, pains of hell_.

gāstgifu f. _special gift of the Holy Spirit_ (e.g. gift of tongues),
WW 200^8.

gāsthālig † _holy in spirit, holy_.

gāstlēas _lifeless, dead_, _El_. [‘_ghostless_’]

gāstlic _spiritual, holy_, _A, Æ_; CP: _clerical (not lay)_, _BH_; CP,
Æ: _ghastly, spectral_, _Nic_. adv. -līce _spiritually_, Æ.
[‘_ghostly_’]

gāstlufu (ǣ) † f. _spiritual love_.

gāstsunu † m. _spiritual son_. Godes g. _Christ_.

gat = geat

gāt f. gs. gǣte, gāte, nap. gǣt, gēt _she-_‘goat,’ _Cr, Ep, Lcd, Rd_.

gātahierde = gāthyrde

gātahūs n. _goat-house_, WW 185^8.

gātbucca m. _he-goat_, _WW_. [‘_goat-buck_’]

gātehǣr n. _goat’s hair_, Æ.

gātetrēow n. _cornel tree_? #Lcd# 32b.

gāthyrde (io) m. ‘_goat-herd_,’ _LL_.

gatu v. geat.

gāð pres. pl. of gān.

ge conj. _and, also_. ge...ge _both...and, not only...but also_;
_whether...or_. ǣg(hwæ)ðer ge...ge _both...and_; _either...or_.

ge- prefix (indicated by the sign + in this Dict.), original meaning
_together_; but it has usually lost all collective or intensitive force.

gē I. (īe) pron. 2 pers. pl., dp. ēow. ap. ēow(ic) _‘ye,’ you_. II. =
gēa

gēa adv. _‘yea,’ yes_, BH.

geabul = gafol

gēac m. _cuckoo_. [v. ‘_gowk_,’ ‘_yeke_’]

gēacessūre f. _wood-sorrel_, #Gl#.

geador _unitedly, together_.

geadrung f. _text_, MtL p8^17.

geaduling = gædeling

geaf pret. 3 sg. of giefan.

geaf- = gif-

geafl = (1) gafol; (2) ceafl

geafol == gafol

gēafon pret. pl. of giefan.

geafu = giefu

gēagl I. mn. _jaws, throat, gullet_, #Lcd#. II. = gāl

gēaglisc (ǣ, ē) _light, wanton_, BH 400^13.

gēaglswile m. _swelling of the jaws_, #Lcd#.

geagn- = gegn-

gēahl = gēagl

gēahð = gēað

geal pret. 3 sg. of giellan.

gealādl f. _gall-disease, jaundice_, #Lcd# 40b.

gēalāgē (gēa lā gēa, AS) _yea, amen_, RHy.

geald pret. 3 sg. of gieldan.

geald- = gald-

gealg _sad, gloomy, rebellious_.  [[from first edition]]

gealga (a) m. _‘gallows,’ cross_, _B, Jul, WW_; CP.

gealgian = geealgian  [[listed as “±ealgian”]]

gealgmōd † _sad, gloomy, angry_.

gealgtrēow (a) n. _‘gallows-tree,’ gallows, cross_, _B, DR_.

gealh == gealg

gēalhswile = gēaglswile

gealla (a, e) m. I. _‘gall,’ bile_, _Mt, VPs, WW_; Æ, CP. II. _a galled
place on the skin_, _Lcd_. [‘_gall_’] (I. and II. possibly the same
word.)

geallādl f. ‘_melancholia_,’ v. OEG 7^223.

gealled _‘galled’ (of horses)_, _Lcd_.

geallig ‘_acris, tristis_,’ #HGl# 456.

gealp pret. 3 sg. of gielpan.

gealpettan (a) _to boast_, NC 291.

gealpettung (æ) f. _boastfulness_, NC 291.

gēamrung (#VPs#) = gēomrung

gēamung = gēmung

gēan = gēn

gēana = gēna

gēan-, see also gegn-

geanbōc? f. _duplicate charter, counterpart_.

gēancyme (ē) m. _meeting_, #EPs# 63^3, ARSHy.

  [[Entry before author’s corrections:
  gēancyme (ē) m. _meeting_, #EPs# 63^3, ARSHy: _coming back, return_:
  ‘_adinventio_,’ RHy 1^4.]]

gēancyrr m. (-cyrnes? f. #RPs# 18^7) _meeting_, _SPs_ 18^7: _return_.
[‘_gainchare_’]

gēanfær n. _going again, return_.

gēangang (ǣ) _return_? LL 8[84].

gēangewrit (ē) ‘_rescriptio_,’ OEG 862.

gēanhweorfan^3 _to return_, #HGl#.

gēanhworfennes f. _return_, #HGl# 470.

gēanhwurf m. _return_, OEG 559.

gēanhwyrft (ǣ) m. _turning again_, #LPs# 125^1.

gēannes f. _meeting_, #HGl# 513.

gēanoð? _complaint_, OEG xiv. [_Goth._ gaunōðus]

gēanryne m. _meeting_, #ERLPs# 58^6.

gēanðingian _to reply_, #Gen# 1009.

geanwyrde _known, acknowledged, confessed_.

gēap I. (ǣ, ē) _open, wide, extensive, broad, spacious, lofty, steep,
deep_: _bent, crooked_: _deceitful, cunning_. II. pret. 3 sg. of gēopan.

gēapes (gs. of gēap) adv. _wide_.

gēaplic _deceitful, cunning_, Æ. adv. -līce, Æ.

gēapneb adj. _(epithet of corslet) meshed_, #Wald# 2^19 (?= *gēapweb
_wide-meshed_).

-gēapnes v. wær-g.

gēapscipe m. _cleverness, cunning, craft, deceit, trickery,
artifice_, Æ.

gēapweb v. gēapneb.

gear pret. 3 sg. of georran.

gēar (ē, ǣ) nm. ‘_year_,’ Æ, AO, CP. tō gēare _in this year_: _yearly
tribute_: _name of the rune for =g=_.

geara = gearwe

geara- = gearo-

gēara _of ‘yore,’ formerly, in former times, once, long since_, AO, CP.
(gp. of gēar)

±gearcian _to prepare, procure, supply_, ÆL. [gearo]

gearcung f. _preparation_.

±gearcungdæg m. _preparation-day, day before the Sabbath_, G.

gēarcyning m. _consul_, WW 375^2.

geard I. m. _‘yard,’ enclosure, court, residence, dwelling, land_, Mdf.
in geardum _at home, in the world_: _hedge_, GD, MtR. II. = gierd

gēardagas † mp. _lifetime_; _days of yore, former days_.

gēardagum † adv. _formerly, in days of old, once_.

geare = gearwe I. and II.

geare- = gear-, gearo-

gēare = gēara

gēarfæc n. _space of a year_, W 72^1.

gearfoð == earfoð

gēargemearc n. _space of a year_, #Gu# 1215.

gēargemynd n. _yearly commemoration_, NC 292.

gēargeriht n. _yearly due_, W 113^9.

gēargerīm (ǣ) n. _number of years_, v. ES 39·342.

gēargetal (æ^1) n. _number of years_, #Lcd# 2·284.

gēarhwamlīce _yearly_, EC 226^6.

gēarlēac = gārlēac

gēarlic _yearly, of the year, annual_, Æ. adv. -līce, CP.

gearlīce = gearolīce

gēarmǣlum _year by year_, #Met# 1^5.

gēarmarcet n. _annual fair_, TC 372^15.

gearn (e) n. _‘yarn,’ spun wool_, #Gl#.

gearnful (NG) = geornful

gearnung = geornung

gearnwinde f. _yarn-winder, reel_, #Gl#, LL 455[15].

gearo (gearu) I. (wk gearwa) gsmn. -(o)wes; asm. gearone; napn. gearu
_prepared, ready, equipped, finished_, #Chr#, W. [‘_yare_’] II. = gearwe
adv.

gēaro = gēara

gearobrygd f. _quick movement, deft playing (of an instrument)_,
#Cra# 50.

gearofolm _with ready hand_, B 2085.

gearolīce _readily, fully, clearly_.

gearor comp. of gearo adj. and gearwe adv.

gearo-snotor, -snottor † _very skilful_.

gearoðoncol _ready-witted_, #Jud# 342.

gearowes gsmn. of gearo.

gearowita m. _intellect, understanding_, #Bo#.

gearowitolnes (a^2) f. _sagacity_, W 53^16.

gearowyrdig _ready of speech_, #Mod# 51.

gēarrīm n. _number of years_, AO.

gēartorht _perennially bright_, #Gen# 1561.

gēarðēnung f. _annual service_, LL 382[38].

gearu == gearo

gearw- = gearaw-

gearugangende _going swiftly_, #Rd# 41^17.

gearuw- = gearw-

gearwan = gierwan

gearwanlēaf = geormanlēaf

gearwe I. adv. comp. gear(w)or; sup. gear(w)ost _well, effectually,
sufficiently, thoroughly, entirely_, Æ, AO, CP. [_Ger._ gar] II. † f.
(usu. pl.) _clothing, equipment, ornament, trappings, harness, armour_.
III. (a, æ) f. ‘_yarrow_,’ #Lcd# 147a.

±gearwian (æ, e, i, ie, y) _to equip, prepare, make ready_, Æ, CP:
_construct, erect, make_: _procure, supply_: _clothe, adorn_.

±gearwung f. _preparation_: _parasceve_.

gearwungdæg (eo^1) m. _parasceve_, JnR.

+gearwungnes f. _preparation_.

gearwutol _austere_, LkL 19^21,22.

gēasceaft v. gēosceaft.

gēasne (_Jul_) = gǣsne

geat n. (æ, e) nap. gatu (geatu #VPs#) _‘gate,’ door, opening_, _Æ, BH,
Bl, G_; AO, CP; Mdf.

gēat pret. 3 sg. of gēotan.

gēatan (ǣ, ē, ēo) _to say ‘yea,’ consent, grant, confirm_. [gēa]

geatolic † _adorned, splendid, magnificent, stately_.

geattorr † m. _gate-tower_.

geatwa = geatwe

geatwan _to equip_, #Rd# 29^6.

geatwe fp. _arms, equipments, trappings, ornaments_: _organs, members_.

geatweard m. _gate-keeper, door-keeper, porter_, _Jn_. [‘_gateward_’]

gēað † f. _foolishness, mockery_. [gēac]

gebellic (OET, Cp 881) = gafollic

gēc (OET) = gēoc

gecel, gecile (#Gl#) = gicel

ged = gæd, gidd

gedd == gidd

gederian = (1) gaderian; (2) derian

gee = gēa

gef = (1) geaf pret. 3 sg. of giefan; (2) (N) gif

gef- = gief-

gēglesc = gēaglisc

gegn = gēn

gegn- see also gēan-

gegncwide m. _reply, answer, retort_: (in pl.) _conversation_.

+gegnian _to meet_, DR.

gegninga = gegnunga

gegnpæð m. _opposing path_, #Rd# 16^26.

gegnslege m. _battle_, #An# 1358.

gegnum † adv. _away, forwards, straight on, thither_.

gegnunga adv. _immediately, directly_: _certainly, plainly, precisely_:
_completely, fully_.

gegoð = geoguð

geher (NG) = ēar

gehhol = geohol, gēol

gehðu † (eo, i) f. _care, anxiety, grief_.

geld = gield

geld- = gild-, gyld-

gelde _sterile_, WW 226^22; 394^26.

gell- = geall-, giell-

gellet n? _bowl_, #Lcd# 122a.

gelm = gilm

gelo = geolu

gelostr = geolster

gelp == gielp

gēlsa = gǣlsa

gelt (#KGl#) = gylt

gēme- = gīeme-

gēmerian = gēomrian

gemme = gimm

gēmnes (#VPs#) = gīemenes

gemstān (ES 7·134) = gimmstān  [[headword spelled “gimstān”]]

gēmung (ēa, ī, ȳ) f. _marriage_, MtR, DR.

gēmungian _to marry_, DR 109^17.

gēmunglic _nuptial_, MtR, DR.

gēn I. (īe) (A, rare in prose) adv. _yet, now, still, again_: _further,
besides, also, moreover_: _hitherto_. II. adj. _direct_.

gēn- = gēan-, gēgn-

gēna = gēn I.

gend == geond

gende = gengde pret. 3 sg. of gengan.

gēnde = gōiende v. gōian.

geng I. = geong. II. = gang. III. pret. 3 sg. of gangan.

+genga m. _fellow-traveller, companion_, W.

gengan, pret. gengde _to go_. [gong]  [[under “gang”]]

±genge I. _prevailing, effectual, appropriate_, _BH, Gu_. [‘_genge_’]
II. n. _troop_, _Chr_; FBO, W: _privy_. [‘_ging_’]

-gengel v. æfter-, for(e)-g.

genigend = giniend pres. ptc. of ginian.

gēno, gēnu = gēn

gēo (īu) adv. _once, formerly, of old, before, already, earlier_, CP
(gīo). [_Goth._ ju]

geoc n. ‘_yoke_,’ Æ, AO, CP: _yoke of oxen_: _a measure of land_, OET
(Ct): _consort_, NG.

gēoc (ēoc) f. _help, support, rescue_: _safety_: _consolation_.

geocboga m. _yoke-bow, yoke_.

gēocend † m. _preserver, Saviour_.

geocian (iuc-) _to yoke, join together_.

gēocian (w. g. or d.) _to preserve, rescue, save_.

geocled n. geocleta (ioc-) m. _a measure of land_, OET (Ct),
v. LL 2·527.

gēocor † _harsh, terrible_: _bitter, sad_. adv. gēocre.

geocsa m. _sob_, #Met# 2^5.

geocstecca _part of a yoke_ (Swt), _bolt of a door, bar_ (BT), #Gl#.
[sticca]

geocsung f. _sobbing_, WW 179^4.

geoctēma (ioc-) m. _animal yoked with another_, WW 106^36.

geocða = gicða

gēodǣd † (iū-) f. _deed of old, former deed_.

geof = gif

geof- = gief-, gif-

geofen = geofon

geofena gp. of geofu = giefu

geofon (i, y) † n. _ocean, sea_.

geofonflōd m. _ocean flood_, #Az# 125.

geofonhūs n. _ship_, #Gen# 1321.

geogað = geoguð

gēo-gēara, -gēare adv. _of old_.

gēoglere, gēogelere m. _juggler, magician_, W 98^9; #HGl#. [_Ger._
gaukler]

geogoð (Æ, AO) == geoguð

geoguð f. ‘_youth_,’ Æ: _young people_, CP: _junior warriors_
(_as opposed to_ duguð): _young of cattle_.

geoguðcnōsl n. _young offspring_, #Rd# 16^10.

geoguðfeorh † n. _time of youth_.

geoguð-hād m., -hādnes f. _state of youth_.

geoguðlic _youthful_.

geoguðlust m. _youthful lust_, #Bl# 59^9.

geoguðmyrð f. _joy of youth_, #Rd# 39^2.

geoguðtēoðung f. _tithe of calves_.

geohol, geohhol = gēol

geoh(h)el- = gēol-

geohsa = geocsa

geoht (iuht) n. _yoke_, v. OEG 7^135.

geohðu = gehðu

gēol n., gēola m. _‘Yule’-tide, Christmas_. ǣrra gēola _December_.
æftera gēola _January_.

geolca = geoloca

geold = gield

gēoldæg (geoh(h)el-) m. _Yule-day, day at Yuletide_.

gēolēan (iū-) n. _reward for past deed_, #Wald# 2^7.

geoleca = geoloca

geolerēad = geolurēad

geolhstor = geolster

gēolmōnað (iūl-) m. _December_.

geolo = geolu

geoloca, geol(e)ca m. ‘_yolk_,’ Æ. [geolu]

geolorand † m. _buckler covered with yellow linden-bark_.

geol-ster, -stor mn. _matter, pus, poison, poisonous humour, disease_,
OEG.

geolstrig _secreting poison, purulent_, OEG.

geolu gmn. geolwes ‘_yellow_.’

geoluhwīt _pale yellow_.

geolurēad _reddish yellow_, WW 375^18.

±geolwian _to become yellow_.

gēomann (īu) † m. _man of past times_.

gēomēowle (īo) † f. _aged wife_? B.

gēomer- = gēomor-, gēomr-

gēomor _troubled, sad, miserable_. adv. -more.

gēomorfrōd _very old_, #Gen# 2224.

gēomorgidd † n. _dirge, elegy_.

gēomorlic _sad, painful_, AO. adv. -līce.

gēomormōd _sorrowful_, Æ.

gēomornes f. _tribulation_, #LPs# 118^143.

gēomorung = gēomrung

gēomrian _to be sad, complain, lament, bewail, mourn_, Æ, AO, CP.

gēomrung f. _lamentation, groaning, moaning, grief_, Æ.

gēomur = gēomor

geon adv. ‘_yon_,’ CP.

geon- = geond-

gēona (NG) = gēna, gēn

geonað pres. 3 sg. of geonian.

geond (e, i, y) I. prep. (w. a. and, rarely, d.) _throughout, through,
over_. geond...innan _throughout_: _up to, as far as, during_. II. adv.
_yonder, thither_.

geondan prep. (w. a.) _beyond_.

geondblāwan^7 (i^1) _to inspire, illuminate_.

geondbrǣdan _to spread over, cover entirely_, B 1239.

geonddrencan (i^1) _to drink excessively, get drunk_, #KGl# 58^40.

geondeardian _to inhabit_, #RPs# 32^8.

geondfaran^7 _to traverse, pervade_, Æ.

geondfēolan^3 (only in pp. geondfolen) _to fill completely_, #Gen# 43.

geondfēran _to traverse_: _surpass_, ÆL 23b^333.

geondflōwan^7 _to flow over or through_, #Hell# 105.

geondflōwende _ebbing and flowing_, OEG 2363.

geondfolen v. geondfēolan.

geond-gān anv., -gangan^7 _to traverse, go round_.

geondgēotan^2 _to pour, pour upon, suffuse_, Æ.

geondhweorfan^3 † _to traverse, pass over, pass through_.

geondhyrdan _to harden thoroughly_.

geondlācan^7 _to traverse, flow over_, #Ph# 70.

geondleccan _to water_, #LPs# 103^13.

geond-leccung (gynd-) f. _moistening, watering_, #Sc# 27^7.

geond-līhtan (CP), -lȳhtan _to illuminate, enlighten_, CP.

geondlīhtend m. _illuminator_, DHy 128^5.

geondmengan _to confuse, bewilder_, #Sol# 59.

geondsāwan^7 _to strew, scatter_.

geondscēawian _to survey, consider, reflect upon, review_.

geondscīnan^1 _to shine upon, illuminate_.

geondscrīðan^1 _to pass through, traverse, stride to and fro_, MFH 163;
W 250^3.

geondscrīðing f. _course, passage_, OEG 263.

geond-sēcan pret. 3 sg. -sōhte _to search thoroughly_: _pervade_.

geondsendan _to overspread_.

geondsēon^5 _to examine_, B 3087.

geondsmēagan _to investigate, examine, discuss_.

geondspǣtan _to squirt through_, #Lcd# 78a.

geondsprengan _to besprinkle_.

geondspringan^3 _to penetrate_, OEG 2840.

geondsprūtan^2 _to pervade_, #Cr# 42.

geond-spurnan, -spyrnian _to cause to stumble_, NG.

geond-stregdan, -strēdan _to scatter, suffuse, besprinkle_, Æ.

geondstyrian _to stir up, agitate_, #Met# 6^15.

geondðencan † _to reflect upon, consider_.

geondwadan^6 (i^1) _to know thoroughly, be versed in_, CP 9^10.

geondwlītan^1 _to look over, contemplate, examine, scan_.

geondyrnan^3 _to run over_, #ÆGr# 277^3.

geong I. (e, i, u) comp. gingra; superl. gingest _‘young,’ youthful_, Æ,
AO, CP: _recent, new, fresh_: (superl.) _last_, B. II. (NG) = gang. III.
= geng pret. 3 sg. of gangan.

geongan = gangan

geongerdōm = geongordōm

geongewifre = gangewifre

geonglǣcan (gyng-, iung-) _to pass one’s youth_, #HGl# 508; OEG 4361.

geonglic _young, youthful_, Æ.

geonglicnes f. _youth_.

geongling (iu-) m. _youth_, #ÆGr# 3^1.

geongordōm †, geongorscipe ‡ m. _discipleship, allegiance_. [_OS._
jungardōm; jungarskepi]

geongra (i) m. _youth_: _disciple, follower, dependant, servant,
vassal_, AO: _assistant, deputy_. [_Ger._ jünger]

geongre (i) f. _female attendant, assistant, deputy_, #Jud# 132.

geonian = ginian

geonlic (MF 103^20) = geonglic?

geonofer adv. _thither_.

geonsīð m. _departure hence, death_, MFH 163.

geonung = ginung

gēopan^2 _to absorb, swallow_, #Rd# 24^9.

geormanlēaf n. _mallow_.

geormenletic _mallow_, WW 135^27.

georn I. (usu. w. g.) _desirous, eager, earnest, diligent, studious_,
AO, CP. [_Ger._ gern] II. = gearn pret. 3 sg. of +iernan.

geornan = giernan

georne adv. _eagerly, zealously, earnestly, gladly_, Æ, AO, CP: _well,
carefully, completely, exactly_, Æ. [_Ger._ gern]

geornes = geornnes

georneste (WW 499^1) = eornoste

georn-ful, -fullic _desirous, eager, zealous, diligent_, AO, CP. adv.
-līce, Æ.

geornfulnes f. _eagerness, zeal, diligence_, Æ, AO, CP: _desire_.

geornian = giernan

geornlic adj. _desirable_, AO. adv. -līce _zealously, earnestly,
diligently, carefully_, Æ, CP.

geornnes f. _zeal, industry_: _evil desire, lust, wickedness_, NG.

geornung f. _yearning, desire_: _diligence_.

geornust- = eornost-

georowyrde (BH) = gearowyrdig

georran = gyrran

georst = gorst  [[under “gors”]]

georstandæg = gierstandæg

georstu interj. _O!_ #VPs#. [hīeran]

gēosceaft f. _destiny, fate_, B 1234.

gēosceaftgāst m. _doomed spirit_, B 1266.

geostra, geostran (ie, ei, y) _‘yester’ (-day, -night)_. [_Ger._
gestern]

gēot = gīet

-gēota v. lēad-g.  [[headword spelled “lēadgeota”]]

gēotan I. (sv^2) _to pour, pour forth, shed_, AO, CP: _flow, flood,
overwhelm_: (±) _found, cast_. [_Ger._ giessen] II. = gēatan

gēotend m. _artery_, WW 352^25.

gēotenlic _molten, fluid_, GPH 394.

gēotere m. _founder (of metal)_, AO 54.

-gēoting v. in-, on-g.  [[headword spelled “ongēotung”]]

gēotton pret. pl. of gēotan II.

geoðu = geohðu = gehðu

gēow = gīw

gēower (GPH 395) = ēower

gēowian = +ēowan = +īewan

gēowine (īu) m. _departed friend_, #Seaf# 92.

geoxa = geocsa

gēp == gēap

ger- = gær-, gearw-, gier-

gēr == gēar

gerd = gierd

gerd- = gyrd-

gerew-, gerw- = gearw-

gernwinde = gearnwinde

gērscipe m. _jest_? #Rim# 11.

gēs v. gōs.

gesca, gescea = geocsa

gēse (ī, ȳ) adv. ‘_yes_.’ [gēa, swā]

gesen _entrails, intestines_, WW 231^39.

gēsine, gēsne = gǣsne

gest = giest

gēst = gāst

gest- = gæst-, giest-

gēstende (OEG 2499) = ȳstende  [[form of “ȳstan”]]

get = geat

gēt I. = gǣt nap. of gāt. II. = gēat pret. 3 sg. of gēotan. III.
(#VPs#), gēta = gīet, gīeta

gētan I. _to destroy, kill_, B 2940 (or? grētan). II. = gēatan

gētenwyrde _consenting, agreeing_. [gēatan]

gi- (NG, etc.) = ge-

gib = gif

giccan _to ‘itch,’_ _Lcd_.

gicce ‘_itch_,’ _Ln_ 33^3 (y).

giccig _purulent_, #HGl# 453.

gicel, gicela (y) m. _icicle, ice_, _DD, WW_. [‘_ickle_’]

gicelgebland n. _frost_, RHy 7^70.

gicelig _glacial, icy_, OEG.

gicelstān m. _hailstone_.

gicenes (y) f. _itching, itch_, #Gl#.

gicða (ie, io, y) m. _scab, itch, itching_, Æ, CP: _hiccough_, #Lcd#.

gid- = gyd-

gīd- = gīt-

gidd (e, ie, y) n. _song, poem_: _saying, proverb, riddle_: _speech,
story, tale, narrative_.

±giddian (ie) _to speak formally, discuss_: _speak with alliteration,
recite, sing_, AO.

giddung f. _utterance, saying, prophecy, song, poetry, poetical
recitation, metre_, Æ.

gīe = gē

giecða (CP) = gicða?

giedd == gidd

gief (rare EWS) = gif

gief- = gif-

giefa (eo, i, y) m. _donor_, CP.

giefan^5 (e, eo, io; ea, ia (A), i, y) w. d. and a. _to ‘give,’ bestow_,
_B, Sol_; AO, CP: _commit, entrust_, _Da_: _give in marriage_, _Chr_.

giefend (e) m. _giver_, DR.

gīefernes (CP) = gīfernes

giefl (i, y) n. _morsel, food_.

giefnes (e) f. _pardon_, DR.

giefu (e, eo, i, y) f. _gift_, _B, Bo, Mt_; AO, CP. tō giefe, giefes
_gratis, freely_: _favour, grace_, _Bl, Lk_: _name of the rune for =g=_.
[‘_give_’]

gield (eo, i) n. _service, offering, worship, sacrifice_:
_money-payment, tax, tribute, compensation, substitute_: _guild,
brotherhood_: _idol, god_.

±gieldan^3 (e, i, y) _to ‘yield,’ pay_, AO, CP: _pay for_: _reward,
requite, render_, AO, CP: _worship, serve, sacrifice to_: _punish_.

-gieldere (y) v. gafol-g.  [[under “gafolgyldere”]]

gieldra = ieldra comp. of eald.

-giella (e, i) v. stān-g.  [[under “stāngella”]]

giellan^3 (e, i, y) _to ‘yell,’ sound, shout_.

gielp (e, i, y) mn. _boasting, pride, arrogance_: _fame, glory_, AO.

gielpan^3 (i, y) _to boast, exult_, CP. [‘_yelp_’]

gielpcwide † m. _boastful speech_.

gielpen (i) _boastful_, CP.

gielpgeorn (i, y) _eager for glory_, BH 92^4.

gielpgeornes (i) f. _desire for glory_, W.

gielphlæden (i) _boastful_, B 868.

gielping (y) f. _glory_, #Sc# 144^11.

gielplic (i) _vainglorious, boastful_: _ostentatious, showy_. adv.
-līce.

gielpna (i) m. _boaster_, CP.

gielpplega (y) m. _war_, #Ex# 240.

gielpsceaða † (e^1, a^2) m. _arrogant, boastful enemy_.

gielpsprǣc f. _boastful speech_, B 981.

gielpword (y) n. _boast_, AO.

gielt = gylt

giem = gimm

gīeman (ē, ī, ȳ) (w. g. or a.) _to care for, heal_, CP: _take notice of,
take heed to, regard, observe_, AO, CP.

gīeme f. _care_.

gīemelēas (ē, ȳ) _careless, neglected, stray_, CP: _incurable_, MtL
p20^11.

gīemelēasian _to neglect, despise_.

gīemelēaslic _careless_, CP. adv. -līce.

gīemelēasnes (ē, ȳ) f. _negligence_, BH 242^18.

gīeme-lēast, -līest f. _carelessness, neglect_, CP.

gīemen (ē, ī, ȳ) f. _care, oversight, heed, diligence, rule_, AO, CP.

gīemend (ȳ) m. _governor_, #Sc# 117^7.

gīem(e)nes (ē) f. _care, anxiety_, DR, NG.

gīeming f. _care, anxiety_, CP 129^20.

gīen = gēn

gīena = gēna

giend = geond

giendan v. gynde.

gieng == geong

gierd (ea, i, y) f. _‘yard,’ rod, staff, twig_, CP: _rood (measure)_.
[_Ger._ gerte]

gierede pret. 3 sg. of gierwan.

±gierela (e, i, y) m. _dress, apparel_, AO, CP. [gearwian]

±gier(e)lian (e) _to clothe_.

+gierelic (e) adj. _of clothes_, WW 503^18.

gierian = gearwian

+giering f. ‘_directio_,’ #RPs# 138^3.

±giernan (eo, y) (w. g.) _to ‘yearn’ for, strive, be eager, desire,
entreat, seek for, beg, demand_, AO, CP. [georn]

+giernendlic (y) _desirable_, #EPs# 18^11.

giernes = geornes

gierning (CP) = geornung

gierran = gyrran

gierstandæg (eo, y) m. _yesterday_. [giestran]

gierstenlic adj. _of yesterday_, DHy 47 (eo).

±gierwan (ea, y) _to prepare_: _cook_: _deck, dress, clothe_, AO, CP.

giest (æ, e, i, y) m. ‘_guest_,’ _Gen, RB_ (y): _stranger_, _MtL_ (e),
_Rd_ (æ): (†) _enemy_.

giesthūs (æ, y) n. ‘_guest house_,’ _Mk_.

giestian (y) _to lodge, be a guest_.

giestig (e) adj. _being a stranger_, MtL 25^38.

giesting (e) f. _exile_, #Gl#.

giestning (e) f. _hospitality, lodging_, NC 296.

giestran adv. _yesterday_, #Rd# 41^44.

giestranǣfen m. _yesterday evening_. adv. -ǣfene.

gīet I. (ē, ī, ȳ) adv. _‘yet,’ still, besides, further, again,
moreover_. ðā. g. _yet, still_. nū g. _until now_. II. pres. 3 sg. of
gēotan.

gīeta = gīet I.

-gietan v. be-g.

gīetsere = gītsere

gīetsian = gītsian

gif (e, ie, y) conj. (w. ind. or subj.) ‘_if_,’ _B, G_, _etc._; CP:
_whether, though_, _B_.

gifa = giefa

gifan = giefan

gifect (#Gl#) = gefeoht  [[listed as “±feoht”]]

gifel = giefl

gifen I. pp. of giefan. II. = geofon

gīfer m. _glutton_, #Soul# 118.

gīfere = gīfre

gīferlīce _greedily_.

gīfernes f. _greediness, gluttony, avarice_, Æ, CP.

gifeðe I. _granted by fate, given_. II. n. _fate, lot_, B 3085.

giffæst _endowed, talented_: (w. g.) _capable of_.

gifheall f. _hall in which gifts were bestowed_, B 838.

gifian (ea, eo) _to present, endow_: _glorify_, DR 78^14: (+) _wait for,
expect_? DR 20^8.

gifig _rich_, A 11·171.

gifl = giefl

gifnes † f. _grace, favour_.

gifol _liberal, generous, bountiful_, CP.

gifola m. _giver_, AS 2^13.

gifolnes (io) f. _liberality_.

gifre _useful_, #Rd# 27^28; 50^3.

gīfre _greedy, rapacious, ravenous_, CP: _desirous of_.

gifsceatt m. _present_, B 378.

gifstōl † m. _gift-seat, throne_.

gift (y) nf. _what is given, price_, _‘gift,’ portion, marriage gift
(by the bridegroom)_, _dowry_: (pl.) _nuptials, wedding, marriage_, Æ.
[giefan]

giftbūr m. _bride-chamber_, #EPs# 18^5.

giftelic = giftlic

giftfeorm f. _marriage-feast_, NC 297.

gifthūs (y) n. _house at which a wedding is being celebrated_, Mt 22^10.

giftian (y) _to give in marriage (of the woman)_, G.

giftlēoð n. _epithalamium_, WW 165^33.

giftlic _nuptial, belonging to a wedding_, Æ.

gifu (Æ) = giefu

giful = gifol

gifung (y) f. _consent_, BH 86^25.

gīg (Cp 142#g#) = gīw

gīgant m. _giant_. [_L._ gigantem]

gīgantmæcg m. _son of a giant_, #Gen# 1268.

gigoð == geoguð

gīhsa = geocsa

gihða = gicða

gihðu = gehðu

gild = gield

gild- = gyld-

±gild (y) n. _‘guild,’ society_, _Ct_.

±gilda m. _member of a brotherhood of related persons_, v. LL 2·378;
445.

gildan = (1) gieldan; (2) gyldan

gilddagas mp. _guild-days, festival-days_.

gilde v. twi-g.

+gildheall (y) f. _guild-hall_, KC 4·277^21.

gildlic adj. _of a guild_.

gildrǣden (y) f. _guild-membership_, Ct.

±gildscipe m. _guild, brotherhood_, _Ct, LL_. [‘_guildship_’]

gildsester (y) m. _measure of bulk belonging to a corporate body_, TC
606; 611.

gillan = giellan

gillister n. gillistre, f. _phlegm, pus, matter_, #Lcd#. [= geolster]

gilm, gilma (e) m. _handful_; _sheaf_.

gilp == gielp

gilt == gylt

gilte f. _young sow_, WW 119^25.

gim = gimm

gīm- = gīem-

gimbǣre _gem-bearing_, OEG.

gimcynn n. _precious stone, gem_.

gimfæst (B 1272) = ginfæst

gimm (y) m. (occl. nap. gimme) _precious stone_, _‘gem,’ jewel_; _Æ, Bl,
VPs_; CP: (†) _sun, star_. [_L._ gemma]

gimmian _to adorn with gems_.

gimmisc _jewelled_, #Nar# 5^13.

gimreced n. _bejewelled hall, palace_, #Met# 8^25.

gimrodor m. _draconite (precious stone)_, OEG.

gimstān m. _stone capable of being made into a gem, jewel_, _Æ_; AO.
[‘_gemstone_’]

gīmung = gēmung

gimwyrhta m. _jeweller_, Æ (y).

gin I. n. _yawning deep_, #Ex# 430. II. adj. = ginn

gīn = gēn

gīna = gēna

gīnan^1 _to yawn_.

gind == geond

ginfæst † _ample, liberal_. [ginn]

ging, gingest v. geong.

gingi-ber, -fer(e) f. ‘_ginger_,’ _Lcd_.

gingra I. (Æ) v. geong. II. = geongra

gingre = geongre

ginian (eo, y) _to ‘yawn,’ gape, make a noise_, AO. [gīnan]

ginn † _spacious, wide, ample_.

ginnan = onginnan

ginnes f. _gap, interval_, Cp 373#i#.

ginnfæst = ginfæst

ginnwīsed (y) _very wise_, #Gu# 839?

ginung (eo, y) f. _gaping, yawning_, #Gl#.

gīo == gēo

giofol == gifol

giohðhād = geoguðhād

gīow = gīw

giowian (RG) = giwian

gipung = gypung

gir- = gearw-, geor-, gier-, gyr-

gird = gierd

giren (#VPs#) = grīn

girstbītung = gristbītung  [[headword spelled “gristbitung”]]

girwan = gearwian

+gīscan _to close, bolt, bar_, #Gl#.

giscian _to sob_, #Bo# 8^8.

gīse = gēse

gīsl, gīsel m. _hostage_, AO. [_Ger._ geisel]

gīslhād m. _state of being a hostage_, Cp 99#o#.

gīslian _to give hostages_, #Chr#.

gist I. m. _‘yeast,’ froth_, #Lcd#. II. = gæst

gist- = gæst-, giest-

gīst = ȳst

gistran = geostran  [[under “geostra”]]

gīstung = gītsung

git dual of pron. 2 pers. (ðu); g. incer; d. inc; a. inc(it) _you two_.
git Johannis _thou and John_.

gīt = gīet

gīta = gīeta

gitrife = giðrife  [[variant of “gȳðrife”?]]

gītsere m. _miser_, Æ, CP.

gītsian (ȳ) _to be greedy, long for, covet_, Æ, CP: (+) _attain_, CP
364^22. [_Ger._ geizen]

gītsiendlic _insatiable_, #RPs# 100^5.

gītsung (ȳ) f. _avarice, greediness, covetousness, desire_, CP.

gīð- = gȳð-

giðu = gehðu

gīu (Æ) == gēo

giu- = geo-

Gīuling _July_, Cp 70#q# (A 20·137).

gīw (ēo) m. _griffin, vulture_, WW 258^7.

±giwian (ī? v. A 16·98) _to ask_, NG.

giwung f. _petition_, N.

glād pret. 3 sg. of glīdan.

glad- v. glæd.

gladian (ea) (†) _to gleam, glisten_: (±) intr. _be glad, rejoice_,
_JnLR, Lcd_: (±) tr. _gladden, rejoice, gratify, appease_, _Æ, VPs_.
[‘_glad_’]

gladine = glædene

gladung f. _rejoicing_, _RB_. [‘_gladding_’]

glæd I. (glad- in obl. cases) (†) _bright, shining, brilliant,
gleaming_, _Gen, Ph, Sol_: _cheerful_, _‘glad,’ joyous_, _Cr_; Æ, CP:
_pleasant, kind, gracious_, _Æ, B, G_. II. n. _joy, gladness_, #Wy# 68.

glædene (a, e) f. _iris, gladiolus_, _Gl_; #Lcd#. [‘_gladdon_’]

glǣdestede = glēdstede

glædine (#Gl#) = glædene

glædlic _bright, shining_, _Wid_: _pleasant, agreeable_, _Ps_. adv.
-līce _‘gladly,’ joyfully, kindly, willingly_, _BH_.

glædmōd _glad-hearted, cheerful, joyous_: _kind, gracious_.

glædmōdnes f. _kindness, bounty_, CP 391^6.

glædnes f. _‘gladness,’ joy_, _BH_; Æ, DR(+).

glædscipe m. _gladness, joy_.

glǣdstede = glēdstede

glǣm † m. _‘gleam,’ brilliance, brightness, splendour, beauty_, _Gen,
Jul_: _a brilliant light_, _Gu_.

glæng == gleng

glær m. _amber, resin_, WW.

glæren _vitreous, glassy_. [glæs]

glæs n. nap. glasu, and (once) glæsas (GPH 397) ‘_glass_,’ _Bo, Cr_; Æ.

glæsen _of glass, glassy_, _Bl_. [‘_glassen_’]

glæsenēage _grey-eyed_, WW 416^1.

glæsfæt n. _glass (vessel)_, BH 398^3 (#o#, #b#), GD 10^16.

glæsful m. _a glassful_, BH 398^3 (#t#).

glæshlūtor _clear, transparent_.

glæterian _to glitter_, OEG, WW.

glæterung f. _shining_, #RPs# 48^15.

glætlic = glædlic

glǣw = glēaw

glappe f. _burdock, buckbean_? #Lcd#.

glasu v. glæs.

glāw = glēaw

glēam m? n? _revelry, joy_, #Gen# 12.

glēaw (ā, ǣ, ē) _penetrating, prudent, wise, skilful_, _G, VPs_; Æ, AO,
CP: (†)_good_. adv. -e. [‘_glew_’]

glēawferhð † _prudent_.

glēawhycgende ‡, glēawhȳdig † _thoughtful, wise, prudent_.

glēawlic (ǣ, ēo) _wise, prudent, diligent_. adv. -līce.

glēawmōd _wise, sagacious_, CP.

glēawnes (ǣ) f. _wisdom, prudence, penetration_, Æ.

glēawscipe m. _wisdom, thoughtfulness, diligence_: _proof, indication_.

glēd (oe) f. _glowing coal, ember, fire, flame_, _Ps_; Æ. [glōwan;
‘_gleed_’]

+glēdan _to make hot, kindle_.

gleddian _to sprinkle, throw over_, #Lcd# 3·292^14.

glēdegesa m. _fiery terror_, B 2650.

gledene = glædene

glēdfæt n. _chafing-dish_, #Lcd# 123b.

gledine = glædene

glednes (#KGl#) = glædnes

glēdscofl (oe) f. _fire-shovel_, Cp 7#u#.

glēdstede † m. _altar_.

glemm m? _blemish, spot_, W 67^8.

glencan = glengan

glendran _to devour, swallow_, MtR.

+glendrian _to precipitate_, LkL 4^29.

gleng mf. (nap. gleng(e)as, glenge, glenga) _ornament, honour_, CP:
_building_, NG.

±glengan (æ) _to adorn, decorate_, ÆL: _trim (lamp)_: (+) _set in order,
compose_.

glenge = gleng

+glengendlic _magnificent, brilliant_. adv. -līce, OEG 1202.

glengful _decked out, adorned_, GPH 395.

glenglic = glengendlic

glentrian = glendran

glēo == glīw

glēof (v. late) = glēow II.

gleomu f. _splendour_, #Ruin# 34?

glēow I. = glīw. II. pret. 3 sg. of glōwan.

glēow- = glēaw-, glīw-

glēsan _to gloss_, #ÆGr# 293^13. [_L._ glossa]

glēsing f. _glossing, explanation, translation_, #ÆGr# 293^14.

glēw = glēaw

glīa (OEG 3173) = glīga gp. of glīg.

glida (io) m. _kite, vulture_, _Æ, Cp_. [‘_glede_’]

±glīdan^1 _to ‘glide,’ slip, slide_, _An, B_; Æ, AO, CP: _glide away,
vanish_.

glidder _slippery_, _VHy_. [‘_glidder_’]

gliddrian _to slip, be unstable_, OEG 4104.

glider (_W_ 239^14) = glidder

gliderung (y) f. _phantom_, WW 401^40.

glīg == glīw

glind m. _hedge, fence_, BC 1·296.

glioda (Cp) = glida

glīsian _to glitter_, _WW_. [‘_glise_’]

glisnian (y) _to ‘glisten,’ gleam, glitter_, _Shr, Run_.

glīt pres. 3 sg. of glīdan.

glitenian _to glitter, shine_.

glitenung f. _coruscation, gleam_.

glitin- = gliten-

glīw (ēo, īg, īo, īu, ēow) n. _‘glee,’ pleasure, mirth, play, sport_,
_Ph_: _music_, _Gn_.

glīwbeam (īg) m. _musical instrument, harp, timbrel_, #LRSPs# 149^3.

glīwbydenestre (ȳ) f. _female musician_, #LPs# 67^26.

glīwcræft m. _music, minstrelsy_.

glīwcum ‘_tibiis_,’ #LPs# 146^10 (ȳ).

glīwdrēam (ēo) m. _music, mirth_, B 3021.

glīwere m. _buffoon, parasite_, OEG.

glīwgamen (īg) n. _revelry_, W 46^16.

glīwgeorn (īg) _fond of sport_.

glīwhlēoðriendlic _musical_, WW 446^36.

glīwian _to make merry, jest, play (music)_, _sing_, _BH_ (ēo), _LL_:
_adorn_, #Rd# 27^13. [‘_glew_’]

glīwiend m. _performer, player_, #SPs# 67^26.

glīwingman (OEG 50^9) ?= glīwman

glīwlic _mimic, comic_, GPH 396.

glīwmǣden (īe) n. _female musician_, #ERPs# 67^26.

glīwman m. _‘gleeman,’ minstrel, player, jester_, _B_ (ēo); CP, WW (īg).

glīwre = glīwere

glīwstæf m. _melody, joy_, #Wa# 52.

glīwstōl m. _seat of joy_, #Rd# 88^8.

glīwung f. _boisterous laughter_, OEG 1472.

glīwword (ēow) n. _song, poem_, #Met# 7^2.

glōf, glōfe f. ‘_glove_,’ _B, Guth_. foxes g. _foxglove_.

+glōfed _gloved_, AS 42^11.

glōfung f. _supplying with gloves_, LL 450[10].

glōfwyrt f. _glovewort, dog’s tongue, lily of the valley_, #Lcd#.

glōm m? _gloaming, twilight_, #Creat# 71.

glōmung f. _‘gloaming,’ twilight_, _DHy_; GD.

glōwan^7 _to ‘glow,’_ _Æ, OEG_.

glōwende _‘glowing,’ burning_, _Lcd_ 80b.

gly- = gli-

gnād pret. 3 sg. of gnīdan.

gnægen = gnagen pp. of gnagan.

gnæt m. _‘gnat,’ midge_, _AO, Lcd, Mt_.

gnagan^6 _to ‘gnaw,’_ _Æ, Ct, DD_.

-gnāst v. fȳr-g.

gnēað _niggardly_, _B, BH_: _frugal_. [v. ‘_gnede_’]

gnēaðlicnes f. _frugality_, OEG 2437.

gnēðe _scanty, sparing_, _WW_. adv. -līce, GD. [v. ‘_gnethe_’]

gnēðelicnes = gnēaðlicnes

gnēðen _moderate, modest_.

gnēðnes f. _frugality_: _scarcity_.

gnīdan^1 _to rub, grind together, crumble_, _Lk_; Æ, AO. [‘_gnide_’]

gnidil m? _rubber, pestle_, Cp 440#p#.

gnīt pres. 3 sg. of gnīdan.

gnōgon pret. pl. of gnagan.

gnorn † I. _sad, sorrowful, troubled, depressed_. II. m. _sadness,
sorrow, trouble_.

gnornan = gnornian

gnorncearig _sad, troubled_, #Jul# 529.

gnorngan = gnornian

gnornhof † n. _prison, cell_.

gnornian _to be sad, murmur, complain, mourn, lament, grieve_, CP.

gnornscendende _hastening away in sadness_, #PPs# 89^10. [scyndan]

gnornsorg † f. _sadness, sorrow_.

gnornung (e) f. _sadness, sorrow, lamentation_, Æ, AO, CP.

gnornword ‡ n. _sad speech, lamentation_.

gnuddian _to rub_, OEG 56^33.

gnyran = gnyrran

gnyrn † f. _sadness, mourning, calamity_: _wrong, insult, fault,
blemish_. [gnorn]

gnyrnwracu f. _revenge, enmity_, #El# 359.

gnyrran _to grind the teeth_, W 138^29: _creak_, #Lcd#.

+gnysan = cnyssan

gnȳðe = gnēað

gōað 3 p. sg. pres. of gōian.

gōc = gēoc

God m. np. -as, -u _a ‘god,’ image of a god_, _Æ, Jul, LL, Ps_; AO:
_God, the (Christian) Deity_, _Æ, BH_; CP.

gōd I. comp. bet(e)ra, bettra, superl. bet(e)st _‘good’ (of persons or
things), virtuous_, _B, Bl, Chr, G_: _desirable, favourable, salutary,
pleasant_, _Bl_: _valid, efficient, suitable_, _Az, Jul, Lcd_:
_considerable, sufficiently great_, _Chr_. II. n. _good thing,
advantage, benefit, gift_, _B, Bl, Mt_; Æ, AO, CP: _‘good,’ goodness,
welfare_, CP: _ability, doughtiness_: _goods, property, wealth_, CP.

godæppel m. _quince_, WW 364^16. [= coddæppel]

godbearn n. _divine child_, _Son of God_: _godchild_, _W_.
[‘_godbairn_’]

godborg m? _solemn pledge_ (_given in church_?), LL 18[33]; 66[33] and
v. 2·332, 1_d_.

godbōt f. _atonement_, LL 258[51].

godcund _religious, sacred, divine, heaven-sent_, _Gen, Chr_; Æ, CP.
[‘_godcund_’]

godcundlic _divine_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce _divinely_, Æ: _canonically_.

godcundmæht n? _divine majesty_, MtL.

godcundnes f. _divine nature, divinity, Godhead_, _Æ, Lcd_: _divine
service_. [‘_godcundness_’]

gōddǣd f. _good work_, _Cr_: _benefit_, _PPs_.

goddohtor f. ‘_goddaughter_,’ _Ct_.

gōddōnd † m. (nap. gōddēnd) _doer of good, benefactor_.

goddrēam † m. _joy of heaven_.

gode- = god-

godfæder m. _God the Father_: ‘_godfather_,’ _Ct, LL_.

godfrecnes (BH 70^12) = godwrecnes

gōdfremmend m. _doer of good_? B 299.

godfyrht (e, i) _godfearing, pious_, _An_. [‘_godfright_’]

godgeld = godgield

godgesprǣce (BH) = godsprǣce

godgield (e^2, i^2, y^2) n. _heathen god, idol_, AO.

godgildlic _of idols_, WW 466^16.

godgim m. _heavenly jewel_? #El# 1114.

godhād m. _divine nature_, CP 261^17.

gōdian _to improve, get better_, _Chr, Lcd_: _make better_: (±) _endow,
enrich_, _KC_; Æ. [‘_good_’]

goding m. _Son of God_, LkR 4^1.

gōdlār f. _good teaching_, LL 304#b#.

gōdlēas _bad, evil_, _BH_. [‘_goodless_’]

gōdlic _‘goodly,’ excellent_, _Gen_: _comely, fair_, GPH 394.

godmægen n. _divine power, divinity_.

godmōdor f. ‘_godmother_,’ _Shr_.

gōdnes f. _virtue_, _Bo_: _goodwill, beneficence, kindliness_, _Bo, Æ_.
[‘_goodness_’]

godsǣd n. _(God’s seed), piety_, #Da# 90.

gōdscipe m. _kindness_, _DR_. [‘_goodship_’]

godscyld f. _sin against God, impiety_, #Jul# 204.

godscyldig _impious_, #Gu# 834.

godsibb m. _sponsor_, _W_. [‘_gossip_’]

godsibbrǣden f. _sponsorial obligations_, W 228^3.

gōdspēdig † _rich, happy_.

godspel n. _glad tidings_, _Mt_: _one of the four gospels_, _An_; Æ, CP:
_the ‘gospel’ (for the day)_, _Mt_.

godspelbodung f. _gospel-preaching, new dispensation_, ÆL 25^682.

godspellbōc f. _book containing the four gospels_, _LL_.
[‘_gospel-book_’]

godspellere m. _‘gospeller,’ evangelist_, _Bl_; Æ, CP.

godspellian _to preach the gospel, evangelize_, _Ps_; Æ, CP.
[‘_gospel_’]

godspell-ic (Æ), -isc _evangelical_.

godspelltraht m. _gospel commentary_.

godsprǣce (ē) n. _oracle_, BH.

godsunu m. ‘_godson_,’ _BH, Chr_.

godðrymm m. _divine majesty_.

godðrymnes f. _divine glory_, AS 9^4?

godwebb n. _fine cloth, purple_, CP.

godwebbcyn? (gode-) n. _purple (cloth)_.

godwebben _purple_, #Bl# 95^19; GD 346^22.

godwebgyrla m. _cloth of purple_, W 197^1.

godwebwyrhta m. _weaver of purple_.

gōdwillende _well-pleased_, EHy 16^6.

godwræc (e^2) _wicked_, #Bl#.

godwræclic _impious_, GD 232^13.

godwrecnes f. _wickedness, impiety_, BH 70^12#b#.

gofol = gafol

gōian _to lament_, NC 346; JAW 27.

gōl pret. 3 sg. of galan.

gold n. ‘_gold_,’ _Æ, OET_; CP.

goldǣht f. _wealth in gold_, B 2748.

goldbeorht † _bright with gold_.

goldblēoh n. _golden hue_, WW 140^24.

goldblōma m. _golden bloom_? W 251^11; #Bl# 105^18.

goldburg † f. _city in which gold is given_? _rich city_?

golde f. _‘solsequia,’ heliotrope_? _marigold_? _WW_ 301^6. [‘_gold_’]

golde- = gold-

golden pp. of gieldan.

goldfæt † n. _golden vessel_.

goldfǣted _plated or adorned with gold_, LL 460[10#h#].

goldfāg _variegated with gold, shining with gold_.

goldfell n. _gold plate_, WW 358^15. [?= *goldðell]

goldfinc m. ‘_goldfinch_,’ _WW_.

goldfinger m. _ring-finger_.

goldfrætwe fp. _gold ornaments_.

goldfyld _covered with gold_, WW 518^4. [gold, fealdan]

goldgearwe fp. _gold ornaments_, NC 298.

goldgeweben _woven with gold_, OEG 4297.

goldgeweorc n. _golden object_, MH 222.

goldgiefa † (i, y) m. _gold-giver, prince, lord_.

goldhilted _golden hilted_, #Rd# 56^14.

goldhladen _adorned with gold_, #Fin# 13.

goldhoma m. _gold-adorned coat of mail_, #El# 992.

goldhord nm. _treasure of gold, treasury_, _El, VPs_; Æ, AO.

goldhordhūs n. _privy_, WW 184^14.

goldhordian _to collect treasure, hoard_, #Sc# 173^12.

goldhroden † _ornamented with gold_. [hrēodan]

goldhwæt _greedy for gold_, B 3074?

goldlæfer f. _gold plate_, #HGl# 431.

goldlēaf n. _gold leaf or plate_, W 263^6. [= læfer]
  [[error for “lǣfer”?]]

goldmæstling (e) n. _brass_, WW. [cp. _Ger._ messing]

goldmāðm m. _treasure_, B 2414.

goldmestling = goldmæstling

goldōra m. _gold ore_, OEG 1810.

goldsele † m. _hall in which gold is distributed_.

goldsmið m. ‘_goldsmith_,’ _Æ_.

goldsmiðu f. _goldsmith’s art_, #Wy# 73.

goldspēdig _rich in gold_, #Jul# 39.

goldtorht _bright like gold_, #Creat# 78.

goldðēof m. _stealer of gold_, LL 54[9,2].

goldðrǣd m. _gold thread_, WW 196^15.

goldweard m. _keeper of gold (dragon)_, B 3081.

goldwecg m. _a lump of gold_, OEG 451.

goldwine † m. _liberal prince, lord, king_.

goldwlanc † _brave with gold, richly adorned_.

goldwlencu f. _gold ornament_, #Bl# 195.

goldwyrt f. _heliotrope_, OEG 26^36.

golfetung (#LPs# 78^4) = gaffetung

gōlon pret. pl. of galan.

golpen pp. of gielpan.

gom- = gam-

gōma m. (sg. or pl. used indifferently) _inside of mouth or throat,
palate, jaws_, _Lcd, Rd, VPs_; Æ. [‘_gum_’]

gombe † f. _tribute_.

gomor _Hebrew measure, omer_, _Æ_. [‘_gomer_’]

gon- = gan-

gond- = gand-, geond-

gōp m. _slave, servant_, #Rd# 50^3. [or ?= gēap]

gor n. _dung, dirt, filth_, _Æ, Cp, Rd_. [‘_gore_’]

gorettan _to gaze, stare about_, OEG 5^3: _pour forth, emit_, GPH 398.

gorettung f. _gazing_, OEG 5^3n.

gorian _to gaze, stare about_, OEG 7^8.

gors (_Cp_), gorst m. _‘gorse,’ furze_, _MH, MtR_: _juniper_, _Lcd_.

gorstbēam m. _furze bush_, Mk 12^26.

gōs f. nap. gēs ‘_goose_,’ _LL, Rd, WW_; Æ.

gōs-fugol m. nap. -fuglas _goose_, Ct.

gōshafoc (u^3) m. ‘_goshawk_,’ _WW_.

gost = gorst  [[under “gors”]]

gōst = gāst

Gota sg. -an pl. ‘_Goth_,’ _BH_.

goten pp. of gēotan.

-gotennes v. tō-g.

gotwoðe f. _goatweed_, #Lcd#.

gōung f. _groaning_, BH 76^15. [gōian]

grād m. (Æ), grāde f. _step, grade, degree, rank_. [_L._ gradus]

grǣd m. _grass_.

grǣda = grēada

grǣdan I. _to cry, call out_, _Lcd_: _to crow (cock)_, _CP_. [‘_grede_’]
II. ds. of wk. adj. _grassy_, ÆL 18^245.

grǣde = grǣd

grǣde-, grǣdi- = grǣdig-

grǣdig (ē) _‘greedy,’ hungry, covetous_, _Æ, B, Bl, Sol_; CP. adv. -līce
_greedily, covetously, eagerly_.

grǣdignes f. _greediness, avarice_, Æ.

grǣdum adv. _greedily_, #Gu# 710.

græf I. (a) n. _cave_, _‘grave,’ trench_, _Seaf_; Mdf. [grafan] II. n?
_style for writing_, WW. [_L._ graphium]

grǣfa? græfe? _bush, bramble, grove, thicket_, _WW_; Mdf: _brush-wood
(for burning)_, _fuel_, _Chr_. [‘_greave_’]

græfen pp. of grafan.

græfere m. _‘sculptor,’ graver_, WW 164^14.

græfhūs n. _grave_, #Sat# 708.

græfsex n. _graving tool_, WW. [seax]

græft mfn. _graven image, carved object, sculpture_, Æ.

græftgeweorc n. _graven image_.

græfð pres. 3 sg. of grafan.

grǣg ‘_grey_,’ _Æ, Ep, Gen, Met, WW_.

grǣggōs f. _grey (wild) goose_, #Gl#.

grǣghǣwe _grey_, WW 402^40.

grǣghama _grey-coated_ (_of spear_? _or wolf_?), #Fin# 6.

grǣgmǣl _grey-coloured_, B 2682.

grǣgōs = grǣggōs

græm- = grem-

græn- = gren-

grǣp = grēp

+græppian _to seize_, MtL 14^31.

græs n. (nap. grasu) ‘_grass_,’ _An, Cp, CP_.

græsgrēne ‘_grass-green_,’ _Ep_ (e^1, oe^2).

græshoppa m. _grass-hopper, locust_.

græsmolde f. _greensward_, B 1881.

græswang † m. _greensward_.

grǣt I. = pres. 3 sg. of (1) grǣdan, (2) grētan. II. = grēat

grǣtan = grētan

graf == græf

grāf nm. ‘_grove_,’ _BC_; Mdf.

-grāfa v. ellen-g.

grafan^6 _to dig, dig up_, _Met, Rd, Rim_: _‘grave,’ engrave, carve,
chisel_, _PPs_.

grafet n. _trench_, EC 354; 355.

gram (o) adj. _angry, cruel, fierce_, AO: _oppressive, hostile_:
(as sb.) _enemy_. [‘_grame_’]

grama m. _rage, anger_, _Æ_: _trouble_, _Lcd_. [‘_grame_’]

gramatisccræft = grammaticcræft

grambǣre _passionate_, CP 289^5.

grame adv. _angrily, fiercely, cruelly_.

gramfǣrnes f. _wrath_, LL (= *grambærnes).

gramhegdig = gramhȳdig

gramheort † _hostile-minded_.

gramhycgende _hostile_, #PPs# 68^25.

gramhȳdig † _hostile, malignant_.

gramian _to anger, enrage_, W 199^2. gramigende _raging_, GPH 402.

gramlic _wrathful, fierce, cruel, severe_, _Æ_. adv. -līce, _Ps_.
[‘_gramely_’]

grammaticcræft m. _art of grammar_, BH 258^15.

grammaticere m. _grammarian_, A 8·327.

grammōd _cruel_, #Bl# 223^33.

gramword n. _evil speech_, #PPs# 74^5.

grand pret. 3 sg. of grindan.

grandorlēas (o) _guileless_, #Jul# 271.

grānian^2 _to ‘groan,’ lament_, _Bl, Ps_.

granu f. _moustache_, Cp 335#m#. [_Ger._ granne]

grānung f. _‘groaning,’ lamentation_, _Æ_.

grāp I. f. _grasp, grip_. [grīpan] II. pret. 3 sg. of grīpan.

±grāpian _to feel for, lay hold of, seize, touch_, _Æ, B, Bl, Rd, VPs_.
[‘_grope_’]

grāpigendlic _tangible_, ÆH 1·230.

grāpung f. _sense of feeling, touch_, _Æ_. [‘_groping_’]

grāscinnen _made of grey skins or grey fur_, #Chr# 1075#d#. [_ON._
grāskinn]

grasian _to ‘graze,’_ _Lcd_.

grasu v. græs.

grātan sbpl. _groats_, #Lcd# 3·292^24.

graðul _gradual, antiphon_.

grēada m. _lap, bosom_, _CP, Lk_. [‘_greade_’]

grēat (æ) comp. grīetra _‘great,’ tall, large, thick, massive_, _A, Æ,
Bo, Chr, WW_: _coarse_, _BC, Lcd_.

grēatewyrt f. _meadow saffron_, WW 298^7.

grēatian^2 _to become enlarged_, _CP_. [‘_great_’]

grēatnes (ē) f. ‘_greatness_,’ _RB_ 88^15.

Grēcisc _Greek, Grecian_, Æ.

grēd == grǣd

grēf- = grǣf-

grēg- = grǣg

grem- = grim-

±gremian (_AO, Mk_), gremman _to enrage, provoke, irritate_, Æ, CP:
_revile_. [‘_greme_’]

gremung (æ) f. _provocation_, #LPs# 94^9.

grēne ‘_green_,’ _Cp, Ct, Lcd_: _young, immature_, _Lcd_: _growing,
living_, LkL (oe): as sb., _Lcd_.

grēnhǣwen _green-coloured_, WW 379^24.

grēnian _to become ‘green,’ flourish_, _Met_.

grēnnes f. _greenness_, _BH_; CP: (in pl.) _green things, plants_,
A 8·310.

grennian _to ‘grin,’ gnash the teeth_, _Jul, Sc_; Æ.

grennung (æ) f. _grinning_, Cp 174#r#.

grēofa m. _pot, pan_, WW. [_Ger._ griebe]

grēop = grēp

grēosn (īo) _gravel, pebble_, #KGl# 76^3. [_Ger._ greiss]

grēot n. _‘grit,’ sand, earth_, _An, B, Gen_; Æ.

grēotan^2 _to cry, weep, lament_, _B, Sol_. [v. ‘_greet_’]

grēothord n. _body_, #Gu# 1240.

grēow pret. 3 sg. of grōwan.

grēp, grēpe f. _land-drain, ditch, furrow_: _burrow_: _privy_, OEG (ȳ).

gres- = græs-

grēt- = grēat-

grētan I. (±) _to ‘greet,’ salute, accost, speak to, challenge_, _Æ, B,
Mk, Jul_: (±) _to seek out, approach, visit_, _B_; W: _ill-treat,
attack_, _AO_: _touch, take hold of, handle, deal with_, _ÆGr_. hearpan
grētan _play the harp_: _cohabit with_. II. † (ǣ) _to weep, bemoan,
lament, deplore_, _Cr_. [v. ‘_greet_’]

grēting f. _‘greeting,’ salutation_, _BH, LkL_ (oe): _present_.

grētinghūs n. _audience chamber_, WW 184^3.

grētingword n. _word of greeting_, #ÆGr# 209^14.

gretta = grytta

greðe ‘_sodalis_’? OEG 29^2.

grēwð pres. 3 sg. of grōwan.

griellan (i) _to irritate, provoke, offend_, _CP_: _gnash the teeth at,
creak_. [‘_grill_’]

grīetra v. grēat.

grīghund m. ‘_greyhound_,’ _WW_ 276^3.

grillan = griellan

grim (CP) = grimm

grīma † m. _mask, helmet_: _ghost_.

grimena _‘bruchus’, caterpillar_? #EPs# 104^34.

grimet- = grymet-

grimful _fierce, violent_, ES 39·348.

grīmhelm † m. _helmet (with visor)_.

grīming _spectre_, WW 446^26.

grimlic _fierce, blood-thirsty, cruel, severe, terrible_, Æ, AO. adv.
-līce. [‘_grimly_’]

grimm _fierce, savage_, _B, Bl_: _dire, severe, bitter, painful_, _BH_;
#Bl#. [‘_grim_’]

grimman^3 † _to rage_: _hasten on_, B 306.

grimmān n. _terrible sin_, BH 50^8#b#.

grīmme _savagely, cruelly, severely_, _AO, Gen_. [‘_grim_’]

grimnes f. _ferocity, cruelty_, _Bl, Gu, WW_. [‘_grimness_’]

grimsian _to rage_, BH.

grimsung f. _harshness, severity_, CP 125^14.

grin _‘ilium,’ region of the groin_, LL.

±grīn (ī, ȳ; also short?) nf. _snare, gin, trap_, _PPs, VPs_; Æ, CP:
_halter, noose_, _Mt_ (y). [‘_grin_’]

+grīnan _to ensnare_.

+grind † n. _impact, crash_.

±grindan^3 (y) _to rub together, grate, scrape_, _Rd_: _gnash_, _Ps_:
_‘grind,’ sharpen_, _Æ, Mt_.

grinde f. _shingle_, BC (v. Mdf).

grindel m. nap. grindlas _bar, bolt_. pl. _grating, hurdle_.

grindere m. _miller_, #Lcd# 3·178^1.

grindetōð m. _grinding tooth, molar_, WW 440^26.

gring == cring

grīnian _to ensnare_, _KGl_. [‘_grin_’]

grint pres. 3 sg. of grindan.

grīosn = grēosn

gripa m. _handful, sheaf_.

±grīpan^1 intr. (w. d. g. or tō) _to seek to get hold of_, _B, Bl, Gen_:
tr. (w. g.) _seize, take, apprehend_, _Sol, WW_. [‘_gripe_’]

gripe m. _grasp, seizure, attack_, _B, WW_; Æ. gūðbilla g. _shield_:
_handful_, _Lcd, Ps_.

grīpend m. _seizer, robber_, WW 516^13.

+gripenes, gripnes f. _seizing, snare, captivity_, #EPs# 34^8.

gripu † f. _kettle, caldron_.

grīpul ‘_capax_’, WW 198^39. [‘_gripple_’]

-grīsan (ȳ) v. ā-g.

grislic _‘grisly,’ horrible_, _HL_ 15^182 (very late).

grist n. _action of grinding_, _WW_: ‘_grist_.’ [grindan]

gristbat- = gristbit-

gristbite m. _gnashing_, W 188^5.

gristbitian _to gnash the teeth_, _BH, Mk, WW_; Æ. [‘_gristbite_’]

gristbitung f. _gnashing of teeth_, _Bl, Mt_. [‘_gristbiting_’]

gristian _to gnash, grind_, #Gl#.

gristle f. ‘_gristle_’, _Gl, WW_.

gristlung (y) f. _gnashing_.

gristra m. _baker_, WW.

gritta = grytta

grið n. _truce_, _(temporary) peace_, _Ma_: _protection of the person,
asylum, sanctuary, guarantee of safety_. [‘_grith_’]

griðbryce m. _breach of ‘grið,’_ _LL_: _penalty for such a breach_,
_LL_. [‘_grithbreach_’]

±griðian _to make a truce or peace_, #Chr#: _protect_, LL.

griðlagu f. _law of temporary or local peace_, LL 470[9].

griðlēas _unprotected_, W 158^7.

groe- = grē-

grōf pret. 3 sg. of grafan.

grom = gram

gron- = gran-

grond pret. 3 sg. of grindan.

gronwisc ‘_acus_’, Cp 160#a# (v. AB 9·35).

grōpian = grāpian

-groren v. be-g.

grorn † I. m. _sorrow, sadness_. II. adj. _sad, agitated_. adv. -e.

grornhof n. _sad home, hell_, #Jul# 324.

grornian _to mourn, complain_.

grorntorn _sadness_, #Rim# 66?

grornung f. _complaint_, NG.

grot I. n. _particle_, _Bo_; AO. [‘_grot_’] II. n. _groats, coarse
meal_, _Gl_. [grēot]

grotig _earthy_, GPH 396.

±grōwan^7 _to ‘grow,’ increase_, _Bo, Cp, Rd, WW_: _germinate_,
_KGl, Mk_.

grōwende ‘_growing_,’ _Gen, KGl_.

grōwnes f. _growth_, BH.

grummon pret. pl. of grimman.

grund m. _‘ground,’ bottom_, _B, Gen, Sol, VPs_: _foundation_, _LkL_:
_abyss, hell_: _plain, country land, earth_, _An, B, Bl, Wid_: _sea,
water_.

grundbedd n. _ground, soil_, #Rd# 81^24.

grundbūend † m. _earth-dweller_.

grunden pp. of grindan.

grundeswelge (i^3, u^3, v^3) f. ‘_groundsel_,’ _Lcd_.

grundfūs _hastening to hell_, #Mod# 49.

grundhyrde m. _keeper of the abyss_, B 2136.

grundinga = grundlunga

grundlēas _bottomless, unfathomable_, _Bo_: _boundless, vast_.
[‘_groundless_’]

grundlēaslic _boundless, vast_, CP 417^10.

grundling m. _groundling (fish)_, BC 3·525 (Mdf).

grundlunga (i^2) adv. _from the foundation, completely_, Æ: _to the
ground, prone, prostrate_, Æ.

grundon pret. pl. of grindan.

grundscēat † m. _region_.

grundsele † m. _abysmal dwelling_.

grundstān m. _foundation-stone_, _WW_. [‘_groundstone_’]

+grundstaðelian _to establish firmly_, ÆL 8^21.

grundwæg m. _earth_, #An# 582.

grundwang † m. _(ground-plain), the earth_: _bottom (of a lake)_.

grundweall m. _foundation_, _Æ, Lk_. [‘_groundwall_’]

+grundweallian _to establish, found_, #EPs# 23^2.

grundwela m. _earthly riches_, #Gen# 957.

grundwyrgen f. _water-wolf_, B 1518.

grunian, grunnian (OEG) _to grunt_.

grunnettan _to ‘grunt,’_ _Cp_.

grunung, grunnung f. _grunting, bellowing_, OEG.

grut m. _gulf, chasm, abyss_: _stone, rock_, OEG 1814.

grūt f. (ds. grȳt, grūt) _groats, coarse meal_, _Cp, Ct, Lcd_: _grains,
the spent grain after brewing_, _Lcd_. [‘_grout_’]

grutt, grutte = grut

gryllan = griellan

grym == grim(m)

grymet-tan, -tian (i) _to grunt, roar, rage_.

grymet-ung, -tung f. _grunting, roaring, bellowing_.

grymm = grimm

grymman = gremman  [[under “gremian”]]

gryn = gyrn

grȳn = grīn

+grynd n. _plot of ground_, TC 231^22.

gryndan I. _to set, sink (of the sun)_, _WW_. [‘_grind_’; grund] II. =
grindan

grynde † n. _abyss_.

grynel (WW 291^3) = cyrnel

grȳnian = grīnian

grynsmið m. _worker of ill_, #An# 919.

grȳpe (OEG 4290; 4744) = grēpe  [[under “grēp”]]

gryre † m. _horror, terror_: _fierceness, violence_, DD 8: _horrible
thing_.

gryrebrōga † m. _terror, horror_.

gryrefæst _terribly firm_, #El# 76a.

gryrefāh † adj. (used as sb.) _spotted horror_, B.

gryregæst (ǣ?) m. _terrible stranger_, B 2560.

gryregeatwe fp. _war-gear_, B 324.

gryrehwīl f. _terrible time_, #An# 468.

gryrelēoð † n. _terrible song_.

gryrelic † _terrible, horrible_.

gryremiht f. _terrible power_, W 195^20.

gryresīð m. _way of terror, dangerous expedition_, B 1462.

gryrran _to gnash_, DD 195.

grys- = gris-

grȳs- = grīs-

grȳt I. pres. 3 sg. of grēotan. II. v. grūt.

grȳto f. _greatness_, #Nar# 8^22. [grēat]

grytta, gryttan pl. _coarse meal, bran, chaff_, _Ep, Lcd, WW_.
[‘_grit_’]

grytte f. _sand_, #Ps#.

grȳttra (A 4·151) = *grietra cp. of grēat. [‘_greater_’]

gryð- = grið-

gū == gēo

guldon pret. pl. of gieldan.

gullon pret. pl. of giellan.

gulpon pret. pl. of gielpan.

guma † m. _man, hero_, _B_. [‘_gome_’]

gumcynn † sn. _human race, men, mankind, nation_.

gumcyst † f. _excellence, bravery, virtue, liberality_. adv. -um
_excellently_.

gumdrēam m. _enjoyment of life_, B 2469.

gumdryhten m. _lord_, B 1642.

gumfēða m. _troop_, B 1401.

gumfrēa m. _king_, #Da# 651.

-gumian v. ofer-g.

gummann m. _man_, B 1028.

gumrīce † n. _kingdom, earth_.

gumrinc † m. _man, warrior_.

gumstōl m. _ruler’s seat, throne_, B 1952.

gumðegen m. _man_, #Cra# 83.

gumðēod f. _folk, people_, #Gen# 226.

gund m. _matter, pus_, _Lcd_. [‘_gound_’]

gundeswilge (_Ep, Erf, Ln_) = grundeswelge

gung = geong

gung- = ging-

gungon pret. pl. of gangan.

gunnon (BH) pret. pl. of ginnan.

gupan ‘_clunibus, renibus, coxe_,’ WW 205^41 (v. A 31·522).

gurron pret. pl. of gyrran.

guton pret. pl. of gēotan.

guttas mp. _‘guts,’ entrails_, _HGl_ 408.

gūð † f. _combat, battle, war_.

gūðbeorn m. _fighting-hero_, B 314.

gūðbill † n. _battle-bill, sword_.

gūðbord † n. _war-shield_.

gūðbyrne † f. _corslet, coat of mail_.

gūðcearu f. _war-trouble_, B 1258.

gūðcræft m. _war-craft_, B 127.

gūðcwēn † f. _warrior queen_.

gūðcyning † m. _warrior king_.

gūðcyst f. _troop, warrior band_? (Kluge): _bravery_? (BT), #Ex# 343.

gūðdēað m. _death in battle_, B 2249.

gūðfana m. _gonfanon, war-banner, ensign, standard_, Æ, AO.

gūð-flā? f., -flān? mf. _battle-arrow_, #Gen# 2063.

gūðfloga m. _winged fighter_, B 2528.

gūðfona = gūðfana

gūðfrēa m. _warlike prince_, #An# 1335.

gūðfrec † _bold in battle_.

gūðfreca † m. _warrior_.

gūðfremmend † m. _warrior_.

gūðfugol m. _bird of war, eagle_, #Rd# 25^5.

gūðgeatwe † fp. _armour_.

gūðgelǣca m. _warrior_, #El# 43.

gūðgemōt † n. _battle, combat_.

gūðgetāwe = gūðgeatwe

gūðgeðingu † np. _battle, contest_.

gūðgewǣde † n. _war-dress, armour_.

gūðgeweorc † n. _warlike deed_.

gūðgewinn † n. _battle_.

gūðhafoc m. _war-hawk, eagle_, †#Chr# 937#a#.

gūðheard _bold in battle_, #El# 204.

gūðhelm m. _helmet_, B 2487.

gūðhere † m. _warlike host, army_.

gūðhorn m. _war-horn, trumpet_, B 1432.

gūðhrēð m. _martial glory_, B 819.

gūðhwæt _fierce in battle_, #Ap# 57.

gūðlēoð n. _war-song_, B 1522.

gūð-mæcga, -maga m. _warrior_, #Sol# 90.

gūðmōd † _warlike_.

Gūðmyrce pl. _Ethiopians_, #Ex# 69.

gūðplega † m. _attach, battle_.

gūðrǣs † m. _battle-rush, onslaught_.

gūðrēaf n. _armour_, #Jul# 387.

gūðrēow _fierce in battle_, B 58. [hrēow]

gūðrinc † m. _warrior, hero_.

gūðrōf † _brave in battle_.

gūðscearu f. _slaughter in battle_, B 1213.

gūðsceaða m. _ravaging invader_, B 2318.

gūðsceorp n. _armour_, #Jud# 329.

gūðscrūd n. _armour_, #El# 258.

gūðsearo † n. _armour_.

gūðsele m. _hall of warriors_, B 443.

gūðspell n. _tidings of a war_, #Gen# 2097.

gūðsweord n. _sword_, B 2154.

gūððracu † f. _hostile attack_.

gūððrēat m. _warlike troop_, #Ex# 193.

gūðweard † m. _war-lord, king_.

gūðweorc n. _warlike deed_, #An# 1068.

gūðwērig _wounded_, B 1586.

gūðwiga † m. _warrior_.

gūðwine † m. _battle-friend, weapon_.

gūðwudu m. _spear_, #Fin# 6.

gy- = ge-

gyc- = gic-

gyd == gid(d)

gyden (AO), gydenu f. (occl. gs. gydenan) _goddess_. [god]

gydenlic ‘_vestalis_’ (= _dealis_? A 31·63), WW 524^33.

gydig (i) _possessed (by a spirit)_, _insane_, OEG 5009. [‘_giddy_’]

gyf = gif

gyf- = geof-, gief-, gif-

gȳf- = gīf-

gyhða (Æ) = gicða

gyhðu = gehðu

gyld = gield

gyld- = gild-

+gyld = gylden

±gyldan I. _to gild_. II. (AO) = gieldan

±gylden ‘_golden_,’ _B, Dan_; Æ, AO, CP.

gyldenbēag (gilden-, Æ) m. _crown_.

gyldenfeax _golden-haired_, WW 348^35.

gyldenhīwe _golden-hued_, OEG 43^5.

gyldenmūða _golden-mouthed (Chrysostom)_, GD 94^24; ZDA 31^7.

gyldenwecg (gylding-) m. _gold mine_, WW 241^17.

gylian, gyllan _to yell, shout_. gyliende ‘_garrulus_,’ OEG 56^138.

gylm = gelm

gylp == gielp

gylt (e, i, ie) m. _‘guilt,’ sin, offence, crime, fault_, _A, Bl, Chr,
Mt_; AO, CP.

±gyltan _to commit sin, be guilty_, _CP, Mt, RB, VPs_. [‘_guilt_,’
‘_guilting_’]

gyltend m. _sinner, debtor_, CP.

gyltig _offending, ‘guilty,’_ _Mt_.

gylting f. _sin_, DR.

gyltlic _sinful_, DR.

gyltwīte n. (gyld-) _fine for unpaid tax_, KC 514.

gylung? ‘_garrulitas_,’ OEG 56^141.

gym = gimm

gym- = gim-

gȳm- = gīem-

gymian = gymmian

gymm = gimm

gymmian _to cut the throat, kill_, OEG 3799.

gyn- = geon-, gin-

gynde pret. of *giendan _to drive_.

-gȳpe (= ī?) v. ǣ-g.  [[headword spelled “ǣgype”]]

gypigend _yawning_, GPH 398.

gypung f. _gaping, open mouth_, GPH.

gyr I. m. _mud, marsh_. II. _fir tree_, WW 269^14.

gyr- = geor-, gier-

gyra = gyr I.

±gyrdan (pret. gyrde), _to ‘gird’ (sword)_, _Gen, PPs_: _encircle,
surround_, _JnL_: (+) _invest with attributes_, _PPs_.

gyrdel (e) m. _‘girdle,’ belt, zone_, _Lcd, Mt_; Æ: _purse_.

gyrdelbred n. ‘_pugillar_,’ WW 277^13.

gyrdelhring n. _girdle, buckle_, WW 432.

gyrdels, gyrder = gyrdel

gyrdil- = gyrdel-

gyrdweg m. _road with a fence on either side_ (BT), KC 3·412^21.

gyrdwīte n. _affliction caused by a rod (used of Moses’ rod)_, #Ex# 15.

gȳren = grīn

gyrman (#LPs# 37^8) = cirman

gyrn † mn. _sorrow, misfortune_.

gyrnstafas mp. _injury, affliction_, #Jul# 245.

gyrnwracu † f. _revenge for injury_.

gyrran^3 [= gierran, georran] _to sound, chatter_, Æ: _to creak, grate_,
#An# 374.

gyrretan _to roar (of lions)_, #LPs#.

gyrsandæg (MFH 97) = gierstandæg

gyrst = grist

gyrstandæg (Æ) = gierstandæg

gyrtrēow n. _fir tree_, WW 138^11.

gyru f. = gyr

gyrwan = gierwian  [[error for “gierwan”?]]

gyrwefenn n. _marsh_, #ÆGr# 60^10.

gȳse = gēse

gȳsel = gīsl

gyst = (1) gæst, (2) gist

gyst- = gæst-, giest-

gysternlicdæg = gierstandæg

gyt = git pron.

gȳt I. pres. 3 sg. of gēotan. II. = gīet

gȳt- = gīet-, gīt-

gyte, gytt (NG) m. _pouring forth, shedding_, Æ: _flood_, Æ. [gēotan]

gytesǣl m. (dp. gytesālum) _joy at wine-pouring, carousal_, #Jud# 22.

gytestrēam m. _running stream_, WW.

gytfeorm f. _ploughing-feast_, LL 452, 21, 4.

gȳðcorn (ī) n. _spurge laurel_? #Lcd#.

gȳðrife f. _cockle_, #Lcd#.

gȳu = gēo




=H=


h is often wrongly prefixed to words, as in Cockney English.

hā m. _oar-thole, rowlock_. æt hā _for each oar, or each oarsman_, #Chr#
1040#c#. [_Icel._ hār]

habban anv. ptc. pres. hæbbende; pres. 1 sg. hæbbe, 2. hæfst, 3. hæfð,
pl. hæbbað, habbað; pret. 3 sg. hæfde; subj. hæbbe; imperat. hafa; pp.
(±) hæf(e)d _to ‘have,’_ _Bl, G_: _possess, own, hold_, _B, Bl, G_:
_keep, retain_, _Bl, VPs_: _entertain, cherish_: _esteem, consider_,
_BH_: _be subject to, experience_, _Mk_: _obtain_, _Chr, Mt_: _assert_,
_Lcd_: used as auxiliary to indicate past tense, _have_, _Æ, Chr, Ex_.
h. for _consider_: (+) _hold, keep from, preserve, retain_, CP, Æ. yfle
+h. _afflict, torment_.

haca m. _hook, door-fastening_, Cp 311#p#. [_Ger._ hake]

-haccian v. tō-h.

hacele (æ) f. _cloak, coat, vestment, cassock, ‘pallium,’_ _AO, WW_; Æ.
[‘_hackle_’]

hacod (æ, e) m. _pike_, _WW_. [‘_haked_’; _Ger._ hecht]

hacole, hacule = hacele

hād m. (rare gs. hāda) _person, individuality_, _Æ, BH, Mt_: _degree,
rank, order, office (especially holy office)_, _Æ, BH, CP_: _condition,
state, nature, character, form, manner_, _B, Sol_: _sex_, _BH, Chr_:
_race, family, tribe_: _choir_. [‘_had_’]

-hād masc. suffix; usu. denotes state or condition, as cildhād, mægðhād.
[_Eng._ -hood]

+hada m. _brother monk_, LL.

hādbōt f. _compensation for injury or insult to a priest_, _LL_.
[‘_hadbot_’]

hādbreca m. _violator of (holy) orders_, LL.

hād-bryce, -brice m. _violation of (holy) orders_, LL.

hādelīce adv. _as to persons_, DHy 29^6.

hādesmann m. _member of a particular order_, #Chr# 995#f#.

hādgrið n. _privilege (as regards peace) of holy orders_, LL 471[19].

±hādian _to ordain, consecrate_, _BH_; Æ. [‘_hade_’]

hādnotu f. _office of a priest_, LL 458#h#.

hādor I. n. _clearness, brightness_, B 414 (or ? hador = heaðor). II. †
(ǣ) _bright, clear, fresh_: _distinct, loud_. [_Ger._ heiter] adv.
hādre.

hādswǣpa m. _bridesman_, WW 174^35.

hādswǣpe (ā) f. _bridesmaid_, WW.

hādung f. _consecration, ordination_, _Chr, LL_. [v. ‘_hade_’]. hādunge
underfōn _to take the veil_.

hādungdæg (i^2) m. _ordination day_, ÆL 33^59.

hæb = hæf

hæb- (#Gl#) = hæf-

hæbb- = habb-, hebb-

hæbbednes f. _continence_? A 8·320^3.

hæbbendlic ‘_habilis_,’ #ÆGr# 54^5.

-hæbbere v. sulh-h.

hæc fm. _grating_, _‘hatch,’ half-gate_, _Ct_.

hæc- = hac-

+hæcca _sausage_, WW 411^20. [hacian]  [[headword spelled “haccian”]]

hæcce I. f. _crozier_. II. gs. of hæc.

hæcwer m. _hatch-weir, a weir in which fish were caught_, KC 3·450.

hǣdor = hādor

hædre † _straitly, anxiously_.

hǣdre = hādre  [[form of “hādor”]]

hæf I. † n. (heaf-, haf- in obl. cases) _sea, ocean_. [cp. _Ger._ haff]
II. (OEG) = hæfe

hǣfd = hēafod

hæfde pret. sg. of habban.

hæfe I. m. _leaven_. [_Ger._ hefe] II. = hefe

hǣfed = hēafod

-hæfednes v. be-, for-h.

hæfegītsung? f. _covetousness_, #EPs# 118^36.

hæfen I. f. _property, possessions_, Æ. [_Ger._ habe] II. f. _‘haven,’
port_, _Chr_. III. = hefen. IV. pp. of hebban.

hæfen- = hafen-

hæfenblǣte = hæferblǣte

hæfene = hæfen II.

hæfer (e) m. _he-goat_.

hæferbīte m. _forceps_, WW 198^16.

hæferblǣte f? _a bird_? _bittern_? _sea-gull_? WW 116^41; 361^17.

hæfergāt = hæfer

hæfern m. _crab_, WW.

hæfig = hefig

hæfne = hæfen

hæfreblēte = hæferblǣte

hæfst v. habban.

hæft I. m. _bond, fetter_: _captive, slave, servant_: _bondage,
imprisonment, affliction_, Æ: (±) _seizing, thing seized_, #CLPs# 123^6.
[_Ger._ haft] II. n. _‘haft,’ handle_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ. [_Ger._ heft] III.
pp. of hæftan.

±hæftan _to bind, fetter_: _arrest, detain, imprison_: _condemn_, DR
197^13. [_Ger._ heften]

hæfte = hæft II.

hæfteclomm m. _fetter_, †#Chr# 942#a#.

+hæftednes f. _captivity_.

hæftedōm m. _slavery, captivity_, #Met# 25^65.

hæften f. _confinement_, #Chr# 1095.

+hæftend m. _prisoner_, MFH 136.

hæftenēod = hæftnīed

hæftincel (e^2) n. _slave_, WW.

hæfting f. _fastening, lock_.

hæftlic _captious_, OEG.

hæftling m. _prisoner, captive_, Æ.

hæftmēce m. _hilted sword_, B 1457.

±hæftnes (v. MF 165) = hæftednes

hæftneð = hæftnoð

±hæftnian _to take prisoner_: _seize, detain_.

hæftnīed (AO), (ē, ȳ; Æ) f. _custody, imprisonment, bondage_.

+hæftnīedan _to take captive_, GD 135^15.

hæftnīedling (ē^2, y^2) m. _captive_, ÆL.

hæftnīednes (ȳ) f. _captivity_, NC 299, GD 346^22.

hæftnoð m. _confinement, imprisonment_.

hæftnung f. _confinement, captivity_.

hæftnȳd (Æ) == hæftnīed

hæftung f. _fetter_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

hæfð pres. 3 sg. of habban.

hæfuc = hafoc

hæg- = hago-, hagu-, hege-

+hǣgan? _to vex, harass_? #Ex# 169 (GK). [_ON._ hā]

+hæge n. _enclosure, meadow_, OEG; Mdf.

hæghāl _safe and sound_, DR.

hæg-tes, -tis, -tesse f. _witch, pythoness_.

hægðorn (Æ) = haguðorn

hægweard m. _keeper of cattle in a common field_, LL 452[20].

hǣh- = hēah-

hæhtis = hægtes

hæl n. _omen_, B 204.

hǣl I. = hǣlu. II. adj. = hāl

hæl- = hel-

hǣl- = hāl-, hēl-

hǣlan I. (±) _to ‘heal,’ cure, save_, _CP, Lcd, Mt, Ps_; Æ (+): _greet,
salute_, GD 36^27. +hǣl! _Hosanna!_ [hāl] II. _to castrate_,
#Lcd# 3·186^22.

+hæld = +hield

hæle † m. _man, hero_.

hǣle = hǣlu

+hǣled = hāl

+hǣlednes f. _healing_, GD 247^11.

hǣlend (ē) m. _Saviour, Christ_. [‘_healend_’; _Ger._ heiland]

hǣlendlic _wholesome_, OEG 153^8.

hǣlet- = hālet-

hæleð † m. (nap. hæleðas, hæleð) _man, hero, fighter_, _B_. [‘_heleth_’;
_Ger._ held]

hæleðhelm = heoloðhelm

hælfter n. ‘_halter_,’ _WW_.

hǣlgere m. _sanctifier_, DR(a^2).

hælhiht _full of corners_. [healh I.]

hǣlig _unstable, inconstant_, #Bo# 115^3.

hǣling f. ‘_healing_,’ _Nic_.

hælm = healm

hǣlnes f. _salvation, safety_, _CP_: _sanctuary_. [‘_healness_’]

hǣlnesgrið n. _peace-privileges attaching to a sanctuary_, LL 471[19].

hǣlotīd f. _prosperous time_, #Chr# 1065#d#.

hǣlsent (Cp 484#e#) = hǣlsiend

hǣlsere m. _soothsayer, augur_, Cp 953#a#.

±hǣlsian _to exercise augury, take omens, foretell, prophesy_, #Gl#.
[hǣl]

hǣls-iend, -igend (ā) m. _soothsayer, augur_.

hǣlsung I. f. _augury, divination_. II. = hālsung I.

hǣlð, hǣlðo f. ‘_health_,’ _Æ_: _salvation_, _Lcd_; Æ: _healing_, _Æ_.

hǣlu f. _health, prosperity, safety, salvation_, Æ, CP.

hǣlubearn † n. _Saviour, Christ_.

hǣlwyrt f. _‘pulegium,’ pennyroyal_, WW 300^24.

hǣlynd = hǣlend

hǣmæht (MkR 1^22) = hēahmiht

hǣman _to have intercourse with, cohabit with_, Æ, CP: _marry_, MtR.

hǣmed (ē) n. (nap. hǣmedru) _cohabitation_, Æ, CP: _marriage_.

hǣmedceorl m. _married man_, LL.

hǣmedgemāna m. _matrimony_, WW 441^24.

hǣmedlāc n. _coition_, #Rd# 43^3.

hǣmedrim m. ‘_lenocinium_,’ OEG 5046.

hǣmedru v. hǣmed.

hǣmedscipe m. _cohabitation, wedlock_, OEG.

hǣmedðing n. _coition, cohabitation_, ÆL: _marriage_.

hǣmedwīf n. _married woman_.

hǣmere m. _consort, bedfellow_, Æ.

hǣmet, hǣmeð = hǣmed

hæn == henn

hǣnan I. _to stone_, _Jn_; Æ. [‘_hene_’] II. = hīenan

hænep (e) m. ‘_hemp_,’ _Lcd, WW_. [_Ger._ hanf]

hænfugel = hennfugol

hænn == henn

hǣnðu = hīenðo

+hæp, hæplic _fit, convenient_.

+hæplicnes f. _convenience_.

hæpse f. _‘hasp,’ fastening_, Æ.

hæpsian _to ‘hasp,’ fasten_, Æ.

hæpte (pret. 3 sg.) _jumped_, ÆL 31^477.

hǣr (ā, ē) n. ‘_hair_,’ _Lcd_; Æ: _a hair_, _Æ, Cp_ (ē), _Mk_.

hær- = har-, hear-, her(e)-

hǣr- = hēr-

hǣre f. _sackcloth of hair_, _Mt_; Æ. [‘_haire_’]

+hǣre, +hǣrede _hairy_.

hǣren _of hair_, _Bl, Lcd_. [‘_hairen_’]

hǣrenfagol sb. _hedgehog_, #SPs# 103^19 (cp. hatte-f.).

hærfest (e) m. _autumn, ‘harvest’-time_, _A, Ct_; AO: _August_,
A 10·185. h. handful _handful of corn (a due belonging to the husbandman
on an estate)_, LL 450. [_Ger._ herbst]

hærfestlic _autumnal_, Æ.

hærfestmonað m. ‘_harvest-month_,’ _September_, _ÆGr_ 43^8.

hærfest-tīd f., -tīma m. _autumn, harvest-time_.

hærfestwǣta m. _autumn rain_, AO 102^7.

hǣrgripa (ē; v. late) m. _seizing by the hair_, LL 611.

hǣriht _hairy_, WW 513^8.

hǣring m. ‘_herring_,’ _Gl_ (ē), _WW_; Æ.

hǣringtīma m. _herring season_, Ct.

hǣrloccas mp. _locks of hair_, _HGl_. [‘_hairlock_’]

hærn f. _wave, tide_: (†) _sea, ocean_.

hǣrnǣdl f. _curling-pin_, OEG 1200.

hærnflota m. _ship_, #Gu# 1307.

hærsceard n. _hare-lip_, #Lcd#. [_Ger._ hasenscharte]

hǣrsyfe (ē) n. ‘_hair-sieve_,’ _A_ 9·264.

hǣs f. _‘hest,’ bidding, behest, command_, _Æ, Gen_. [hātan]

hæsel m. _‘hazel’ shrub_, _Gl, Lcd_; Æ; Mdf.

hæselhnutu f. ‘_hazel-nut_,’ _Gl, WW_ (a).

hǣsere m. _master, lord_, LkLR.

hæsl = hæsel

hæslen _of hazel_, _Lcd_. [‘_hazelen_’]

hæsp = hæpse

hæssuc = hassuc

hǣst † I. _violent, vehement_. adv. hæst-e, -līce. II. f. _violence,
strife_.

hǣswalwe (WW 7^28) = *sǣswealwe

hæt m. ‘_hat_,’ _Cp, AO_; Æ.

hǣt pres. 3 sg. of hātan.

±hǣtan (ā) tr. _to ‘heat,’_ _Shr, Lcd_: intr. _become hot_, _Gl_.

hǣtcole = hǣðcole

hǣte f. _heat_, Æ, AO. [hāt]

hæteru np. _garments_, _ÆH_. [‘_hater_’]

hǣto = hǣtu

hǣts (ÆL 18^350) = hægtes

hǣtst pres. 2 sg. of hātan.

hætt = hæt

hǣtte = hātte, v. hātan.

hættende _attacking_. [hatian]

hættian (e) _to scalp_, LL 334, 30, 5.

hǣtu (o^2, e^2) f. _‘heat,’ warmth_, _Bl, Mt, VPs_; Æ: _fervour,
ardour_, _VHy_.

hǣð I. mn. _‘heath,’ untilled land, waste_, _Ex_; Mdf: _heather_, _Gl,
Lcd_. II. = hæða  [[II. error for “hǣða”?]]

hǣða m. _hot weather_.

hǣðberie f. _whortleberry_, #Lcd#.

hǣðcole f. _name of a plant_, WW.

hǣðen I. (ē) _‘heathen,’ heathenish, pagan_, _Æ, Bl_; AO, CP. II. m.
_gentile, heathen man (especially of the Danes)_, _Æ, Mk_.

hǣðena m. _heathen_, LkR 21^25.

hǣðencyning m. _heathen king_, #Da# 54.

hǣðencynn n. _heathen race_, #Gen# 2546.

hǣðendōm m. _‘heathendom,’ false religion_, _LL_.

hǣðenfeoh n. _heathen sacrifice_? #Jul# 53.

hǣðenfolc n. _heathen people_, W 223^12.

hǣðengield (i^3, y^3) n. _idolatry_: _idol_.

hǣðengilda (y^3) m. _idolater_, Æ.

hǣðenhere m. _Danish army_, #Chr#.

hǣðenisc _‘heathenish,’ pagan_, _AO_.

hǣðennes f. _heathenism, paganism_, _BH_. [‘_heathenesse_’]

hǣðenscipe m. _paganism, idolatry_, _Æ, Chr_ (ē). [‘_heathenship_’]

hǣðenstyrc m. _heathen calf (the golden calf of the Israelites)_,
#PPs# 105^17.

hǣðfeld m. _heath-land_, #Bo# 34^27.

hǣðiht _heathy_, KC.

hǣðin- = hǣðen-

hǣðstapa † m. _heath-stalker, wolf, stag_. [stæppan]
  [[under “steppan”]]

hǣðung f. _heating_, ÆH 1·286. [*hǣtung]

hǣwen (ē) _blue, purple, azure_.

hǣwengrēne _cerulean_, WW 379^23.

hǣwenhydele f. _a plant_, #Lcd#.

hafa, imperat. of habban; hafast, hafað = hæfst, hæfð pres. 2 and 3 sg.
of habban.

-hafa v. wan-h.

hafala = hafela

hafastu = hafast ðu  [[form of “habban”]]

hafecere m. ‘_hawker_,’ _LL_.

hafela † (ea) m. _head_.

hafelēst = hafenlēast

hafen pp. of hebban.

hafenian † _to hold, grasp_. [hebban]

hafenlēas _destitute, needy, poor_, _Æ, WW_. [‘_haveless_’; hæfen]

hafenlēast f. _want, poverty_, Æ.

hāfern = hǣfern  [[headword spelled “hæfern”]]

hafetian (i^2) _to clap, flap_, Æ.

hafoc (ea) m. ‘_hawk_,’ _OET, Wyrd_.

hafoccynn n. _hawk-tribe_, Æ.

hafocere m. _hawker_, WW 235^9.

hafocfugel m. _hawk_, LL (162^19).

hafocwyrt f. _a plant_, #Lcd#.

hafola = hafela

-hafol(nes) v. wan-h.

hafuc = hafoc

hafudland (WW 147^18) = heafodland  [[headword spelled “hēafodlond”]]

haga I. m. _hedge, enclosure, curtilage_, _WW_; Mdf: _fortified
enclosure_, _B_: _homestead, house_, _Ct_. [‘_haw_’] II. m. ‘_haw_,’
_WW_ 204^20: _trifle_, _WW_ 138^39; 269^5.

hagal == hagol

hagaðorn = haguðorn

hage- = hago-

+hagian (impers.) _to please, suit_. gif him (hine) tō ðǣm +hagige _if
he can afford it_.

hago- v. also hæg-.

hagol (æ^1, e^1, a^2, e^2) m. ‘_hail_,’ _Æ, Gen, Met, Ph_: _hail
shower_, _Bo_: _name of the rune for =h=_.

hagolfaru (hægl-) f. _hailstorm_, #Wa# 105.

hagolian _to ‘hail,’_ _AO_ (-gal-).

hagolscūr m. _hail-shower_.

hagolstān m. ‘_hailstone_,’ _Æ_.

hagorūn (ea) f. _spell_, #Nar# 50^14.

hagospind (ea) n. _cheek_. [haga]

hagosteald I. (hæg-, heh-) _unmarried, independent_. II. m. _unmarried
man attached to a court, bachelor, young man, warrior, liege man_.
[_Ger._ hagestolz] III. n. _celibacy_, #Rd# 21^31. IV. (heh-) _virgin_,
LL, NG.

hagostealdhad (hæg-) m. _unmarried state_.

hagostealdlic (heh-) _virgin_, DR 66^1.

hagostealdmonn m. _bachelor, warrior_.

hagostealdnes (heh-) f. _virginity_, N.

hagu- = hago-

haguðorn (æ^1) m. ‘_hawthorn_,’ _Gl, Mt, Lcd_.

ha ha interj. ‘_ha! ha!_’ _ÆGr_.

hal = heal

hal- = heal(h)-

hāl- = hǣl-

±hāl _‘hale_,’ ‘_whole,’ entire, uninjured, healthy, well, sound, safe,
genuine, straightforward_, _Lcd, Mt_; Æ, CP. wes ðu h., h. westu, h. bēo
ðu _hail!_

hālbǣre _wholesome, salutary_.

halc (OET 489) = healh

hald = heald

haldan = healdan

  [[from first edition, printed as:
  hald, haldan = hald, healdan]]

hāleg = hālig

hāleg- = hālg-

±hālettan (ǣ) _to greet, hail, salute_.

hālettend m. _middle finger (used in saluting)_, WW.

hālettung f. _greeting, salutation_.

hālfæst _pious_? _healthy_? RB 72^6.

hālga I. wk. form of adj. hālig. II. m. _saint_, _Æ, Ct_. [‘_hallow_’]

hālgawaras = hāligwaras

±hālgian _to ‘hallow,’ sanctify_, _Æ, Jn_: _consecrate, dedicate,
ordain_, _BH, Bl, Chr_; Æ: _reverence_, †_Hy_: _keep holy_, _Bl_.

+hālgigend m. _sanctifier_, DHy 64^2.

±hālgung f. _‘hallowing,’ consecration_, _BH_.

hālgungbōc f. _benedictional_, NC 299.

hālgungram m. _consecrated ram_, Æ.

hāli- = hālig-

hālig _‘holy,’ consecrated, sacred_, _A, Lk_: _venerated_, _Æ, G, VPs_:
_godly, saintly_, _CP, Mk_. as sb. _what is holy_, _MtL_. adv. -līce.

hāligan I. _to heal up, get well_, CP. II. = hālgian

hāligdæg m. _holy day, Sabbath_, _MkL, LL_. [‘_holiday_’]

hāligdōm m. _holiness, righteousness, sanctity_, _Æ_; CP: _holy place,
sanctuary, chapel_, Æ: _relics, holy things_, _LL_: _holy office_,
CP 51^1. [‘_halidom_’]

hāligdōmhūs m. ‘_sacrarium_,’ CM 818.

hāligern n. _holy place, sanctuary_.

hāligmōnað m. _(holy month), September_.

hālignes f. _‘holiness,’ sanctity, religion_, _Bl, Ps_; Æ: _holy place,
sanctuary_, _CP, W_: _holy thing, relic_.

hāligportic m. _sanctuary_, #CJVPs#.

hālig-rift, -ryft, -reft f. _veil_, Æ.

hāligwæcca m. _vigil-keeper_, LL (224^27).

hāligwæter n. ‘_holy water_,’ _BH_.

hālig-waras, -ware mp. _saints_, N.

hāligweorc n. _sanctuary_, #APs# 73^7.

halm = healm

hālor † n? _salvation_. [hǣl]

hālp = healp pret. 3 sg. of helpan.

hals- = heals-

hāls- = hǣls-

hāls f. _salvation_, #Cr# 587?

hālsere = hǣlsere

halsgang (WW 190^32) = healsgund

hālsian (±) (ēa) _to adjure, call up, convoke_, _CP, Mt, OET, VPs_:
_exorcise_, LL. [v. ‘_halse_’ and also hǣlsian, healsian]

hālsigend I. m. _exorcist_, Æ. II. = hǣlsigend  [[under “hǣlsiend”]]

halstān = healstān

hālsung f. _exorcism_, _LL_. [v. ‘_halsing_’] (v. also hǣlsung and
healsung.)

hālswurðung f. _thanksgiving for safety_, #Ex# 581. [hāls]

halt == healt

halð = heald II.

hālwenda m. _Saviour_, Æ.

hālwende _healing, healthful, salutary_, Æ, CP: _sanctifying_, Æ.

hālwendlic _salutary, wholesome_. adv. -līce, Æ, CP.

hālwendnes f. _salubrity_, BH 28^30.

hālwynde = hālwende

ham I. m? _under-garment_ (‘_subucula_,’ OEG), _WW_. [‘_hame_’] II. =
hamm

hām I. m. ds. hām _‘home,’ dwelling, house_, _Bl, Jn, LL_; AO: _manor,
estate, hamlet_, _Æ, BH, Mt_. II. adv. _‘home,’ homewards_, _Chr, Jn_;
Æ. III. ‘_cauterium_,’ A 30·258; 33·390.

hama m. _covering, dress, garment_: _womb, ‘puerperium,’_ v. OEG:
_slough of a snake_, NC 299: _bridle_? #Lcd# 3·42^12 (A 30·257).

hāma m. _cricket_, WW. [_Ger._ heimchen]

hāmcūð _familiar_, NG.

hāmcyme m. _home-coming, return_, _Æ_. [‘_homecome_’]

hamele f. _rowlock_ (only in phr. æt ǣlcre hamelan _for every oar_, i.e.
_rower_, #Chr# 1039#e#). [_ON._ hamla; v. also hā]

hamelian _to hamstring, mutilate_, _Chr_. [‘_hamble_’]

hamer = hamor

-hamer v. clod-h.

±hāmettan _to house serfs_, Ct, LL.

hāmfærelt n. _going home_, AO 146^21.

hāmfæst _resident, settled in or owning a house_, Æ.

hāmfaru f. _attack of an enemy in his house, housebreaking_: _fine for
housebreaking_. [v. LL 2·504]

hāmhenn f. _domestic fowl_, #Lcd# 92a.

+hamian _to establish in a home_? JnL p188^7.

hāmlēas _homeless_, #Rd# 40^9.

hamm I. m. _piece of pasture land, enclosure, dwelling_, _Ct_; ÆL; Mdf.
[‘_ham_’] II. f. _‘ham’ (part of leg)_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ.

+hammen _studded with nails (of shoes)_? GD 37^13.

-hamod v. +fiðer-h.

hamola (o^1) _mutilated person_? ANS 98·127. tō hamolan besciran _to
shave the beard off (as insult)_, LL 68, 35, 3.

hamor (o^1, e^2) m. ‘_hammer_,’ _Jul, WW_.

hamorian (amer-) _to beat out, forge_, GPH 396.

hamorsecg m. _hammer-sedge_, #Lcd#.

hamorwyrt f. _black hellebore, wall-pellitory_, _Lcd_ 1·374.
[‘_hammerwort_’]

hāmscīr f. _aedileship_, #Gl#.

-hāmscyld v. riht-h.

hāmsittend m. _home-possessor_.

hāmsittende _living at home_.

hāmsīð m. _return home_, HL 10^273.

hāmsīðian _to return home_, WW 118^18.

hāmsōcn f. _offence of attacking a man in his own house_, _LL_: _the
franchise of holding pleas of this offence and receiving the penalties
for it_: _the penalty itself_, _Ct_. [‘_hamesucken_’]

hāmsteall m. _homestead_, _Ct_. [‘_homestall_’]

hāmstede m. ‘_homestead_,’ _Ct_.

hamule (#Chr# 1039#e#) = hamele

hamur = hamor

hāmweard _homewards, towards home, on the way home_, _Chr_; Æ.
[‘_homeward_’]

hāmweardes adv. ‘_homewards_,’ _Chr_.

hāmweorðung f. _ornament of a home_, B 2998.

hāmwerod (eo^2, u^3) n. _household_, BH 191^22.

hāmwerd (Æ) = hāmweard

hāmwyrt f. _house-leek_, _Lcd_. [‘_homewort_’]

hān f. _(boundary-)stone_, _BC_. [‘_hone_’]

hana m. _cock_, Æ. [_Ger._ hahn]

hanasang m. _cock-crow_, MH 4^16.

hancrēd (ǣ) m. _cock-crow_, Æ. [crāwan]

hancrēdtīd (o^1) f. _time of cock-crow_, WW 413^35.

hand (o) f. (gds. handa) ‘_hand_,’ _Jn, VPs, WW_; AO, CP, Æ. brād h.
_palm_. on h. gān _to yield_. on h. syllan _to give a pledge_: _side
(in defining position_), _Æ_. swīðre, winstre h. _right, left, hand_. on
gehwæðere h. _on both sides_: _power, control, possession, charge_, _Ps,
RB_. on h. āgiefan, tō handa lǣtan _to hand over (to)_. on handa sellan
_promise, bargain_. tō handa healdan _hold (land) of another_. on handa
settan _entrust, commit_: _agency_, _Ps, VPs_: _person regarded as
holder or receiver of something_.

handæx f. _‘dextralis,’ a kind of axe_, WW 221^22.

handbæftian (ea^2, a^3) _to lament_, NG.

handbana † m. _slayer by hand_, B.

handbell f. ‘_hand-bell_,’ _Ct_.

handbōc f. _‘handbook,’ manual_, _LL, WW_.

handbona = handbana

handbred n. _palm of the hand, breadth of the hand_, ÆL.

handclāð n. _towel_, _Æ_. [‘_handcloth_’]

handcops m. _handcuff, manacle_.

handcræft m. _manual skill, power of the hand, handicraft_, _Æ, LL_.
[‘_handcraft_’]

handcwyrn f. _hand-mill_, Æ. [cweorn]

handdǣda m. _doer with his own hand_, LL.

handele = handle

+handfæstan _to betroth_.

handfæstnung (e^2) f. _joining hands in confirmation of a pledge_, WW.

handfull nf. ‘_handful_,’ _Ep, LPs_.

handgang m. _imposition of hands_: _surrender_.

handgemaca m. _companion in labour_, ÆL 23^421.

handgemōt † n. _battle_, B.

handgesceaft f. _handiwork_, #Gen# 455.

handgesella (o^1) m. _companion_, B 1481.

handgestealla † m. _companion_, B.

handgeswing n. _blow, stroke_, #El# 115.

handgeweald n. _power, possession_, #PPs# 105^30.

handgeweorc n. _‘handiwork,’ creation_, _Æ, Ps_.

handgewinn n. _manual labour, work, struggle, contest_.

handgewrit n. _handwriting, agreement, deed_.

handgewriðen _woven by hand_, B 1937. [wrīðan]

handgift f. _wedding present_, †Hy 10^18.

handgong = handgang

handgripe m. ‘_hand-grip_,’ _B_ 965?

handgrið n. _peace, protection given by the king’s hand_, _LL_
(v. 2·494). [‘_handgrith_’]

handhabbend _red-handed (thief)_, LL 172[6].

handhæf m? n? _burden_, LkL 11^46.

handhamur m. ‘_hand-hammer_,’ _WW_ 448^2.

handhrægl n. _napkin, towel_, WW 127^1.

handhrine m. _touch_, #An# 1022.

handhwīl f. _instant_, _Æ_. [‘_handwhile_’]

handle f? ‘_handle_,’ _Cp_.

handlēan † n. _requital, recompense_.

handleng(u) f. _a hand’s length_, IM 124^74.

±handlian _to ‘handle,’ feel_, _Lcd_; Æ: _discuss_, _A_ 8·304; 308.

handlīn n. _hand-cloth, napkin_.

handlinga adv. _by hand_, ÆL 11^247: _hand to hand, at close quarters_,
_Æ_. [‘_handlings_’]

handlocen † _joined together by hand_.

handlung f. ‘_handling_,’ _Æ_.

handmægen † n. _bodily strength_.

handmitta = anmitta

handnægl m. _finger-nail_, #Lcd# 125a.

handplega † m. _fight, battle_.

handprēost m. _domestic chaplain_, Æ.

handrǣs m. _onrush, attack_, B 2072.

handrōf _famed for strength_, #Ex# 247.

handscalu = handscolu

handscolu † f. _retinue_, B.

handscyldig _condemned to lose a hand_, LL 471[13,1].

handseald _given personally (by the king)_, LL 637[12].

handseax n. _dirk, dagger_, Æ.

handselen ‘_mancipatio_,’ WW 449^29.

handseten f. _attestation, signature, ratification_, Ct.

handsex = handseax

handslyht = andslyht

handsmæll m. _blow with the hand, ‘alapa,’_ JnLR 19^3.

handspitel m. _hand-shovel, spade_.

handsporu f. _claw, finger_, B 986.

handstoe n. _cuff, sleeve_, v. ES 38·352.

handswāgelīce adv. _similarly_, RB. [and-]

handswyle m. _swelling on the hand_, WW 205^10.

handtam _tamed by hand_, ÆL 8^86.

handðegn m. _retainer, servant_.

handðwēal n. _washing of the hands_, WW 146^9.

handweorc n. _handiwork_, _Rd, LL_. [‘_handwork_’]

handworht _made with hands_.

handwundor n. _marvel of handiwork_, B 2768.

handwyrm (o) m. _a kind of insect_, _Cp, WW_. [‘_handworm_’]

handwyrst f. _wrist_, _WW_. [‘_handwrist_’]

+hange (o) _disposed, inclined to_, #Rim# 42.

hangelle f. _appendix_, #Rd# 45^6.

hangen pp. of hōn.

hangian (±) (intr.) _to ‘hang,’ be hanged_, _Æ_; CP: _depend, rest on_,
_Æ_: (tr.) _hang, suspend_, _Æ, Lcd_.

hangra m. _hanger, wooded slope_, Mdf.

hangrǣd? (ES 39·348) = hancrēd

hangwīte? n. _penally for miscarriage of justice_, EC. [v. ‘_hangwite_’]

hār I. ‘_hoar_,’ _An_: _hoary, grey, old_, _B, Jud, Met, Wa_. II. = hǣr

hara m. ‘_hare_,’ _Ep_; Æ.

haranhige _hare’s foot (plant)_, #Lcd#.

haranspeccel _viper’s bugloss_, WW 299^6.

hāranwyrt = hārewyrt

harasteorra m. _dogstar_, WW 198^34.

hard = heard

hārehūne = hārhūne

hāre-wyrt, hāran- (#Lcd#) f. _a plant, ‘colocasia,’_ WW 135^5.

hārhūne f. _horehound_.

hārian _to become hoary or grey_, _Æ, Shr_. [‘_hoar_’]

hārnes f. _hoariness_, _WW_. [‘_hoarness_’]

hārung f. _hoariness, age_, #ÆGr# 295^14.

hārwelle, hārwenge (Æ) _hoary, grey-haired_.

hārwengnes f. _hoariness, old age_, WW 198^31.

hās ‘_hoarse_,’ _WW_.

hāsæta m. _oarsman, rower_, #Chr# 1052#e#. [hā]

hasewa = haswa wk. form of hasu.

hāshrīman _to sound harshly_.

hāsian _to be or become ‘hoarse,’_ _Æ_.

haslhnutu (_WW_) = hæselhnutu

hāsnes f. ‘_hoarseness_,’ _WW_; Æ.

hassuc m. _coarse grass_, _KC_. [‘_hassock_’]

hāsswēge _sounding hoarsely_, GPH 391.

hasu † (ea) _dusky, grey, ashen_.

hasufāg _grey, ashen_, #Rd# 12^1.

hasupād _grey-coated_, †#Chr# 937.

haswigfeðre † _grey-feathered_.

hāt [S 62] I. _‘hot,’ flaming_, _Gu, Lcd_; Æ, CP, AO: _fervent,
excited_, _Bl_: _intense, violent_, _An, Gu, Ph_: _inspiring_?
_attractive_? #Seaf# 64. II. n. _heat, fire_. III. (±, not + in N) n.
_promise, vow_, _LkL_; CP.

+hata m. _enemy_, WW 393^30.

±hātan^7 active pret. hē(h)t, hē(h)ton; passive pret. (origly. pres.)
hātte (_CP, Mt_) _to command, direct, bid, order_, _Æ, Ct_: _summon_,
_Dan_: _vow, promise_, _Jul_: (w. nom. = voc.) _name, call_, _AO_; CP:
_be called_, Æ. [‘_hight_’]

hāte adv. _hotly, fervidly_, _Æ_. [‘_hot_’]

hātheort (y^2) I. n. _anger, rage_. II. (±) _wrathful, furious,
passionate_, Æ, CP: _ardent, whole-hearted_. adv. -līce.

hātheorte f. = hātheort I.

+hātheortian _to become angry_.

hātheortnes f. _rage, fury, mania_, Æ, CP: _zeal, fervour_.

±hāthiertan (i, y) _to become angry_, CP.

hāthige m. _anger_, #PPs# 89^7. [hyge]

hāthort (#KGl#) = hātheort

hat-ian, -igan _to ‘hate,’ treat as an enemy_, _CP_; Æ.

hātian _to be or get ‘hot,’_ _VPs_.

hatigend m. _enemy_, #ÆGr# 205^8.

hātigende _becoming hot_, #Lcd#.

hatigendlic _hateful_, ÆL 3^605.

+hātland n. _promised land_, BH 346^8.

hatol _hostile, bitter_, _Æ, WW (KGl)_. [‘_hatel_’; cp. hetol]

hātte v. hātan.

hattefagol sb. _hedgehog_, #APs# 103^8 (cp. hǣren-f.).

hatung f. _hatred_, _LPs_; Æ. [‘_hating_’]

hātung f. _heating, inflammation_, #Lcd#.

hātwende _hot, burning_, #Ex# 74.

+haðerian = heaðorian

haðoliða m. _elbow_, #Lcd# 99a.

-hāwe v. earfoð-h.

hāwere m. _spectator_, CP 229^17.

±hāwian _to gaze on, view, look at, notice_, Æ, CP.

hāwung f. _observation_, AS.

hē m., hēo f., hit n. (pers. pron.) _‘he,’ she, it_; pl. _they_:
(reflex. pron.) _himself, herself, itself_.

hēa I. np. and nsm. (wk.) of hēah adj. II. = hēah adv. III. = hīe, hī,
nap. of hē.

hēa- = hēah-

heador = heaðor

hēador, hēadēor == hēahdēor

hēaf m. _mourning, lamentation, wailing_, AO. [= hēof]

hēafd- = hēafod-

heafdian _to behead_.

hēafed = hēafod

heafela = hafela

hēafian (Æ) = hēofian

hēaflic _sad, grievous_, #Bl# 123^6.

heafo (B 2478) nap. of hæf.

heafoc = hafoc

hēafod n. gs. hēafdes ‘_head_,’ _Æ, JnR, VPs_. hēafdes ðolian _to
forfeit life_: _top_, _OET_: _source, origin_: _chief, leader_, _CP,
Chr_: _capital (city)_, _AO_.

hēafodæcer (afu) m. _chief field_, WW 147^19.

hēafodǣdre f. _cephalic vein_, #Lcd# 95b.

hēafodbān n. _skull_, #Lcd#.

hēafodbēag m. _crown_, #Bo# 112^23.

hēafodbend m. _diadem, crown_: _head-bond, fetter about the head_, Æ.

hēafodbeorg f. _helmet_, B 1030.

hēafodbeorht _with a splendid, shining head_, #Rd# 20^2.

hēafodbiscop m. _high priest_, Æ.

hēafodbolla m. _skull_.

hēafodbolster n. _pillow_.

hēafodbotl n. _ancestral seat_, Ct.

hēafodburh f. _chief city_, Æ, AO.

hēafodclāð n. _head-cloth, head-dress_, _WW_; ÆL. [‘_headcloth_’]

hēafodcwide m. _important saying_, LL: _chapter_, DR.

hēafodcyrice f. _cathedral_, LL.

hēafodece m. _headache_, Æ.

hēafodfrætennes (e^3) f. _hairpin, ornament for the hair_, WW.

hēafod-gemæcca, -gemaca (CP) m. _mate, companion, fellow-servant_.

hēafodgerīm n. _number by heads, greatest number_, #Jud# 309.

hēafodgetel n. _cardinal number_, #ÆGr# 283^8.

hēafodgewǣde n. _face-covering, veil_, Æ, W.

hēafodgilt m. _deadly sin, capital offence_, LL 380[2].

hēafodgimm † m. _head’s gem, eye_.

hēafodgold n. _crown_, #PPs#, W.

hēafodhǣr n. _hair of the head_, WW.

hēafodhebba m. _beginning_, A 8·304: _prime mover_, ÆL 23^365.

hēafodhrægl (u^2) n. _head-dress_, #Sc# 74^2.

hēafodhrīefðo f. _scurfiness of the head_, #Lcd# 85b.

hēafodiht (e^3) _with a head or tuft_.

hēafodleahter m. _capital crime, deadly sin_, Æ.

hēafodlēas ‘_headless_,’ _WW_; Æ.

hēafodlic _capital, deadly (crime)_, _Bl_. [‘_headly_’]

hēafodling m. _equal, fellow-servant_, _MtL_ (ud). [‘_headling_’]

hēafodlond n. _strip of land in a field, left for turning a plough_,
_Ct_; WW. [‘_headland_’]

hēafod-mǣg †, -māga ‡ m. _near blood-relation_.

hēafodmann m. _‘head-man,’ leader, captain_, _WW_; Æ.

hēafodmynster n. _church, cathedral_.

hēafodpanne f. _skull_, _Mt_. [‘_headpan_’]

hēafodport m. _chief town_, #Chr# 1086.

hēafodrīce n. _empire_, AO 58^31.

hēafodsār m. _pain in the head_, #Lcd#.

hēafodsīen † f. _(eyesight), eye_.

hēafodslæge (u^2) m. _head of a pillar_, WW 376^15.

hēafodsmæl _‘capitium,’ part of a woman’s dress_, WW 276^18; 369^19.

hēafodstede m. _chief place_, AO: _high place, sacred place_,
LL 470[3,5].

hēafodstōl m. _capital_, AO.

hēafodstōw f. _place for the head_, BH 324^3.

hēafodswīma m. _dizziness_, #Gen# 1568.

hēafodsȳn = hēafodsīen

hēafodsynn (ǣ^1) f. _deadly sin_, W 290^25.

hēafodðwēal n. _washing of the head_, WW 146^8.

hēafodwærc m. _pain in the head_, _Lcd_; WW. [‘_headwark_’]

hēafodweard I. f. _watch over the head_? B 2909: _body-guard_,
LL 444[1]. [‘_headward_’] II. m. _chief protector, leader_. III. f.
_chapter_.

hēafodwind m. _chief wind (E, S, W or N wind)_, #Lcd# 3·274.

hēafodwīsa † m. _chief, director_.

hēafodwōð f. _voice_, #Rd# 9^3.

hēafodwund f. _wound in the head_, LL 20[44].

hēafodwylm m. _tears_, #El# 1133: _burning pain in the head_.

hēafodwyrhta m. _chief workman_, ÆH 2·530.

heafola = hafela

hēafre = hēahfore

hēafsang m. _dirge_, WW 430^22. [hēofan]

heafu (B 1862) nap. of hæf.

heafuc (#VPs#) = hafoc

hēafud = hēafod

hēag == hēah

heaga- = hago-

hēage (_Æ_) = hēah adv.

heago- = hago-, hagu-

hēagum v. hēah.

hēah I. (ē) gsm. hēas, asm. hēan(n)e, gp. hēar(r)a, dp. hēagum, hēam,
comp. hīerra (ē, ēah, īe, ȳ); sup. hīehst (ēa, ē, ȳ) _‘high,’ tall,
lofty_, _Æ, BH, Lcd, VPs, etc._: _high-class, exalted, sublime,
illustrious, important_, _CP, VPs_: _proud, haughty_: _deep_: _right
(hand)_. II. adv. _‘high,’ aloft_, _ÆGr_.

hēahaltāre m. _high altar_, W.

hēahbeorg m. _mountain_, #PPs# 94^4.

hēahbiscop m. _archbishop, pontiff_: _(Jewish) high priest_, HL 10^430.

hēahbliss f. _exultation_, #PPs# 118^111.

hēahboda m. _archangel_, #Cr# 295.

hēahburg f. _chief city, metropolis_: (†) _town on an eminence_.

hēahcāsere m. _emperor_, †Hy 7^60.

hēahcleofa m. _principal chamber_.

hēah-clif n. nap. -cleofu _high cliff_.

hēahcræft m. _high skill_, #Rd# 36^4.

hēahcræftiga m. _architect_.

hēahcyning † m. _high king, God_.

hēahdēor n. _stag, deer_.

hēahdēorhund (hēador-) m. _stag-hound_.

hēahdēorhunta m. _stag-hunter_, Ct.

hēahdīacon m. _archdeacon_.

hēah-eald* superl. -yldest (CM 36) _excellent, distinguished_.

hēah-ealdor, -ealdormann m. _ruler, patrician_.

hēahengel m. _archangel_, Æ.

hēahfæder m. _patriarch_, Æ, CP: _God_.

hēahfæst _permanent, immutable_, #Wid# 143.

hēahfæsten n. _fortified town, city_.

hēahflōd m. _deep water, high tide_.

hēahfore f. ‘_heifer_,’ _Æ, BH, WW_.

hēahfrēa † m. _high lord_.

hēahfrēols m. _great festival_, LL 344[47].

hēahfrēolsdæg m. _great feast day_, LL 252[25].

hēahfrēolstīd f. _great festival_, LL 252[22,2].

hēahfru (_WW_) = hēahfore

hēahfȳr n. _towering flame_, #Whale# 22.

hēahgǣst m. _Holy Ghost_, #Cr# 358.

hēahgealdor n. _charm_, #PPs# 57^4.

hēahgerēfa m. _high sheriff, chief officer, proconsul, prefect_, Æ.

hēahgesamnung f. _principal synagogue_, #Mk# 5^22.

hēahgesceaft f. _noble creature_, #Gen# 4.

hēahgesceap n. _fate_, B 3084.

hēahgestrēon † n. _rich treasure_.

hēahgetimbrad _high-built_, #Sat# 29.

hēahgetimbru † npl. _lofty edifice_.

hēahgeðring n. _whelming flood_, #Rd# 4^27.

hēahgeðungen = hēahðungen

hēahgeweorc n. _excellent work_.

hēahgnornung † f. _deep grief_.

hēahgod m. _Most High, God_, #PPs# 56^2.

hēahgræft _carved in bas-relief_, WW 348^9.

hēahhād m. _holy orders_, LL (334^6).

hēahhelm _loftily crested_, ZDA 33·238.

hēahhēolode (ēh-) f. _elecampane_, #Lcd# 28b.

hēahheort _proud_, #Da# 540.

hēahhlið † n. _high hill_.

hēahhwiolod (ē^1) _having high wheels_, WW 140^32.

hēahhylte n? _high wood_? Ct.

hēahhyrde m. _archimandrite, head abbot_, OEG 910.

hēahhyrne = ēaghyrne

hēahlǣce m. _learned physician_, MH.

hēahland † n. _mountainous country_.

hēahlārēow m. _head teacher_, WW.

hēahlēce = hēahlǣce

hēahleornere n. _high teacher, master_, OEG 910.

hēahlic = hēalic

hēahlufe † f. _great love_.

hēahmægen n. _great force_: _power, virtue_, ÆL.

hēahmæsse f. _high mass_.

hēahmæssedæg m. _high-mass day_, NC 300.

hēahmiht ‡ f. _high authority, great might_.

hēahmōd † _high spirited, exultant_: _proud, haughty_.

hēahmōdnes f. _pride_, CP 301^1.

hēahmunt m. _mountain_.

hēahnama m. _most exalted name_, †Hy 7^18.

hēahnes (Æ) = hēanes

hēahra v. hēah.

hēahreced † n. _high building, temple_.

hēahrodor m. _high heaven_, #Gen# 151.

hēahrūn = hagorūn

hēahsācerd m. _high or chief priest_.

hēahsǣl † f. _great happiness_.

hēahsǣðēof? m. _chief pirate_, WW.

hēahsangere m. _chief singer_, BH 314^3.

hēahsceaða m. _chief pirate_, OEG 8^228. [scaða]  [[under “sceaða”]]

hēahscēawere (ē^1) m. ‘_pontifex_,’ DR 21^1.

hēahscīreman (ē^1) m. ‘_procurator_,’ DR 193^6.

hēahseld n. _rostrum, throne_.

hēahsele m. _high hall_, B 647.

hēahsetl n. _exalted seat, throne, judgment-seat_, _Æ, JnL_ (e^1).
[v. ‘_settle_’]

hēahsomnung (MkL; ē^1) = hēahgesamnung

hēahstēap _very high_, #Gen# 2839.

hēahstede m. _high place_, B 285.

hēahstefn † _having a high prow_.

hēahstrǣt m. _highway_, _Ct_. [‘_high street_’]

hēahstrengðu f. _strength_, #PPs# 107^7.

hēahsunne (ē^1) adj. mp. _very sinful_, MkR 2^15.

hēahsynn f. _deadly sin, crime_.

hēahtīd f. _festival, holy day_, _LL_. [‘_hightide_’]

hēahtimber m. _lofty building_, #Cra# 45.

hēahtrēow f. _solemn compact_, #Ex# 388.

hēahðearf f. _great need_, #PPs# 117.

hēahðegen m. _chief officer, captain_, Æ: _apostle_, Æ: _angel_.

hēahðegnung f. _important function_, #Ex# 96.

hēahðēod (ē^1) f. _great people_.

hēahðrēa m. _great terror_, #Gen# 2545.

hēahðrymm ‡ m., hēahðrymnes † f. _great glory_.

hēahðu † = hīehðu

hēahðungen _of high rank, illustrious_, AO.

hēahwēofod n. _high altar_, WW 186^21.

hēahweorc = hēahgeweorc

hēahwita m. _high councillor_, #Chr# 1009.

hēahyldest v. hēaheald.

heal = (1) healh; (2) heall I.

hēal (#Bl#) = hāl

hēala m. _hydrocele_, CP 65^5.

healærn n. _hall-building_, B 78.

heald I. n. _protection_, _Chr_ 1036; _KC_. [‘_hold_’; = hield] II.
_sloping, inclined, bent_.

+heald = +hield

healdan^7 (a) (±) (tr. and intr.) _to ‘hold’ (‘i-hald’), contain, hold
fast, grasp, retain, possess, inhabit_, _Æ, Chr_; CP. tō handa h. _hold
(land, etc.) of another_: (±) _curb, restrain, rule, reign_, _Chr, CP_:
(±) _keep, guard, preserve, foster, cherish, defend_, _Æ, Bl, Mt, Ps_;
AO: _withhold, lock up_: _maintain, uphold, support_, _Æ, LL_: _regard,
observe, fulfil, do, practise_, _Bl_; Æ: _take care_, CP: _celebrate,
hold (festival)_: _hold out_ (intr.), _last_. ongēan h. _resist_:
_proceed, go_: _treat, behave to, bear oneself_.

+healddagas mp. _kalends_, WW 176^27.

+healde _contented_? _careful_? v. MF 162.

healdend m. _protector, guardian, ruler, king, lord, God_.

+healdendgeorn _continent_, DR 45^10? (a^1).

healdiend ‘_custodiens_,’ #EPs# 114^9.

±healdnes f. _keeping, observance_, BH: _guard, watch_, #APs# 38^2.

healdsum (hal-) _sufficient_, ANS 129·25.

+healdsum _provident, economical, frugal_, CP: _chaste, continent_, ÆL.

±healdsumnes f. _keeping, observance, devotion_, Æ: _custody,
preservation_: _continence, chastity_.

+healdung f. _keeping_.

hēalēce (#Gl#) = hēahlǣce

hēalede _suffering from hydrocele, ruptured_, CP.

healf (a) I. adj. ‘_half_,’ _A, Ct, Jud, Lcd_; Æ, AO. ðridde h., etc. =
_two and a half, etc._ [_Ger._ drittehalb] II. (a) f. _half_, _Æ, G,
Chr_: _side_, _Gl_ (a), _Mt, Ct_; Æ, AO: _part_, CP.

healfclǣmed _half-plastered_, HL 17^267.

healfclungen (a^1) _half-withered_, Cp 265#s#.

healfclypigende adj. _semi-vowel_, #ÆGr#.

healf-cwic, -cucu _half dead_, AO, CP.

healfdēad _half-dead_, #Lcd#.

healfeald (a^1) _half-grown_, #Lcd# 92a.

healffēðe _lame_, GPH 396.

healffrēo _half-free_, W 171^4#e#.

healfhār _somewhat hoary_, A 8·449.

healfhēafod n. _front part of the head_, #ÆGr# 74^5.

healfhrūh _half-rough_, WW 152^14.

healfhunding m. _cynocephalus_, #Nar#.

healfhwīt _somewhat white_, WW 163^7.

healfhȳd _half a hide (of land)_, LL 460[7,1].

healfmann m. ‘_halfman_,’ _ÆGr_ 27.

healfmarc _half a mark_ (v. marc).

healfpenigwurð n. _halfpenny-worth_, LL, W.

healfrēad _reddish_, WW 149^35.

healfscyldig _partially guilty_, ZDA 31·23.

healfsester m. _half a ‘sester’ (measure of bulk)_, WW 444^4. [_L._
sextarius]

healfsinewealt _semicircular_, WW 179^28.

healfslǣpende _half-asleep_, LV 3; MH 138^1.

healfsoden _half-cooked_.

healfter = hælfter

healftryndel n. _hemisphere_, WW 140^7.

healfunga _to a certain extent, partially, imperfectly_, Æ, CP.

healfwudu m. _field-balm_, #Lcd# 44b.

healgamen m. _social enjoyment_, B 1066.

healgian = halgian  [[headword spelled “hālgian”]]

healh m. (? n. at LHy 6^31) (nap. halas) _corner, nook, secret place_,
_CP, Guth, WW_: _corner of land left by the stream in a river valley_,
_Ct_ (v. Mdf). [‘_hale_’]

healhihte _having many angles_, OEG 121.

hēalic (ē) _high, elevated, exalted, lofty, sublime_, _Æ_; CP: _deep,
profound, intense_, Æ, CP: _lordly, noble, great, illustrious,
distinguished_, _Æ_; CP: _proud, haughty_: _egregious, heinous_, W. adv.
-līce _highly, aloft_, _Æ_: _in or to high position or rank, loftily_,
_BH_: _intensely, very_, _Bl_. [‘_highly_’]

hēalicnes f. _sublimity, majesty_, Æ.

heall I. f. _‘hall,’ dwelling, house_, _B, Mt_; Æ, CP. II. = healh. III.
_rock_, OEG 4111.

heallic _palatial_.

heallrēaf n. _wall-tapestry_, Ct.

heallwāhrift n. _wall-tapestry_, Ct.

healm I. (a, æ) m. _‘haulm,’ stalk, straw_, _Lcd, MtL, VPs_: _‘culmen,’
thatched roof_? _land_? LL 116[61]. II. = helm

healmstrēaw n. _stubble_, #SPs# 82^14.

healoc = holc

healp pret. 3 sg. of helpan.

healreced n. _hall-building_, B 68.

heals (a) m. _neck_, _Gen_: _prow of a ship_. [‘_halse_’; _Ger._ hals]

healsbēag † m. _collar, necklace_.

healsbeorg f. _neck-armour_, OEG.

hēalsbōc f. _phylactery_, G. [hāls]

healsbrynige _corslet_, v. OEG 2^418.

healsfæst adj. _as a slave_, #Gen# 2238.

healsfang n. _fine prescribed in substitution for capital and other
punishments, preferential share of the_ ‘wergeld,’ _LL_ (v. 2·489).
[‘_halsfang_’]

healsgebedda f. _beloved bedfellow, consort, wife_, B 63.

healsgund (a^1) m. _neck-tumour_, #Lcd#, WW.

healsian _to entreat earnestly, beseech, implore_, AO, CP. [v. also
hālsian, hǣlsian]

healsiendlic (ā), -igendlic _that may be intreated_, #APs# 89^13:
_imploring_, GD 17^23. adv. -līce _importunately_.

  [[Original entry:
  healsiendlic (ā) _that may be intreated_, #SPs# 89^13. adv. -līce
  _importunately_.]]

healsittend † m. _sitter in hall_.

healsleðer n. _reins_, OET 522.

healsmægeð f. _beloved maid_, #Gen# 2155.

healsmyne m. _necklace_, Æ. [mene]

healsod (a^1; e^2) mn. _head-cloth_.

healsōme f. _neck-tumour_, #Lcd# 132b.

healsrefeðer (a^1) f. _feathers of a pillow, down_, #Rd# 41^86. [cp.
_OHG._ halsare ‘_cervical_’]

heals-scod, -ed = healsod

healstān (a) m. _small cake_, WW.

healsung f. _prayer, supplication, conjuring, entreaty_. [v. ‘_halse_’
and also hālsung and hǣlsung]

healsunggebed (a) n. _litany_.

healsungtīma (a) m. _time of supplication_, NC 299.

healswærc m. _pain in the neck_, #Lcd# 113a.

healswriða m. _necklace_, #Rd# 5^4.

healswyrt (a) f. _a plant, daffodil_? ‘_epicurium, auris leporis_,’
_Lcd, WW_; OEG. [‘_halswort_’]

healt (eo) _‘halt,’ limping, lame_, _AO_.

healt- = heald-

healtian _to ‘halt,’ limp_, _CP, VPs_ (a); Æ: _hesitate_, ÆL 18^98:
_fall away_, _BH_.

healðegn † m. _hall-officer_.

healwudu m. _woodwork of hall_, B 1317.

hēam v. hēah.

hēam-ol, -ul _miserly, frugal_, Cp.

hēamolscipe m. _miserliness_, NC 300.

hēan I. _lowly, despised, poor, mean, abject_, _B, VPs_; Æ, AO.
[‘_hean_’] adv. hēane. II. v. hēah. III. (±) _to raise, exalt, extol_,
_BH_. [= *hīen, hȳn; ‘_high_’]

hēanes f. ‘_highness_,’ _A_ (hēah-), _CP_: _something high, high place,
height_, _Mt_ (hēah-), _VPs_. on hēanissum _in the highest_, ‘_in
excelsis_,’ Æ: _excellence, sublimity_, CP: _high rank_.

hēanhād m. _difficulty_, WW.

hēanlic _ignominious, abject, poor_, AO. adv. -līce.

hēanmōd † _downcast, depressed, sad_.

hēannes I. (ē) f. _treading down_, NG. II. = hēanes

hēanspēdig _poor_, #Cra# 26.

hēap mf. (_of things_) ‘_heap_,’ _Cp, CP_: _host, crowd, assembly,
company, troop, band_, _Bl_; Æ, CP.

±hēapian _to ‘heap’ up, collect, bring together, accumulate_, _Lk_.

hēapmǣlum adv. _by companies, in troops, flocks_, _Æ, CP_; AO.
[‘_heapmeal_’]

hēapum adv. _in heaps, in troops_.

hēapung f. _heap_, _BH_. [‘_heaping_’]

hear- (N) = heor-

hēara = hēahra (v. hēah)

hearcnung = heorcnung

heard (a) _‘hard,’ harsh, severe, stern, cruel (things and persons)_,
_B, Bl, Cr, Mt, Lcd_: _strong, intense, vigorous, violent_, _B, Bl_:
_hardy, bold_, _B_; AO.

heardcwide m. _harsh speech, abuse_ (or ? hearmcwide), #Cr# 1444.

hearde adv. _‘hard,’ hardly, firmly, very severely, strictly,
vehemently_, _Æ_: _exceedingly, greatly_, Æ.

heardecg I. † _sharp of edge_. II. f. _sword_, #El# 758.

heardhara m. _a fish, mullet_? Cp.

heardhēaw _chisel_, Cp 408#c#.

heardheort _hard-hearted_, Æ: _stubborn, obstinate_, Æ.

heardheortnes f. _hard-heartedness_, Æ, CP.

heardhicgende † _brave_.

±heardian _to be or become hard_, _Lcd_: _harden_, _Lcd_. [‘_hard_’]

hearding † m. _bold man, hero_.

heardlic _severe, harsh, terrible_: _excessive_. adv. -līce _harshly,
resolutely, severely, sternly_: _stoutly, bravely_, Æ: _excessively_:
_hardly_ (‘_paulatim_,’ ‘_tractim_’), ES 42·174.

heardlicnes f. _austerity_.

heardmōd _brave, bold, over-confident_, Æ: _obstinate_, ÆL 36^326.

heardmōdnes f. _obstinacy_, ÆH 1·252^18.

heardnebba m. _raven_, ÆH 2·144^15.

heardnes f. ‘_hardness_,’ _Ep, Mt, Lcd, RB_.

heardra (OEG) = heardhara

heardrǣd _firm, constant_, #Gen# 2348.

heardsǣlig _unfortunate, unhappy_.

heardsǣlnes f. _calamity_, AO 104^17.

heardsǣlð f. _hard lot, calamity, unhappiness_: _misconduct,
wickedness_, CP.

heardwendlīce _strictly_, BH 365^15.

hearg (æ, e) nap. heargas, (e) m. _temple, altar, sanctuary, idol_, AO,
CP: _grove_? #Az# 110.

heargeard (herh-) m. _dwelling in the woods_, #Wif# 15.

hearglic (h) _idolatrous_, WW 236^2.

heargtræf (æ^1) n. _idol-temple_, B 175.

heargweard m. _temple-warden, priest_ (herig-), #An# 1126.

hearh == hearg

hearm (e) I. m. _damage_, _‘harm,’ injury, evil, affliction_, _B, Gen_;
Æ, CP: _grief, pain_, _Gen_: _insult, calumny_. II. adj. _harmful,
malignant, evil_.

hēarm = hrēam

hearma m. _shrew-mouse_? _weasel_? OET (Cp 666). [_OHG._ harmo]

hearmascinnen _made of weasel skins_? #Chr# 1075#d#.

hearmberg (æ) m. _grave_, #Rune Casket#.

hearmcwalu f. _great suffering_, #Cr# 1609.

hearmcweodelian (#VPs#) wv. = hearmcweðan

hearmcweðan^5 _to speak evil of, revile_, NG.

hearmcweðend (e^1) m. _slanderer_, #JPs# 71^4.

hearmcwiddian _to calumniate_, #Bo#.

hearmcwide † m. _calumny, blasphemy_: _heavy sentence, curse_.

hearmcwidol _evil-speaking, slanderous_, Æ.

hearmcwidolian (eo^2, e^3) _to calumniate_, #Ps# 118^122.

hearmcwidolnes f. _slander_, #EPs# 118^134.

hearmdæg m. _day of grief_, B 3153.

hearmedwīt † n. _grievous reproach_.

hearm-ful, -fullic _hurtful, noxious_.

-hearmgeorn v. un-h.

hearmheortnes f. _murmuring, complaint_, WW 511^16.

hearmian _to ‘harm,’ injure_, _Æ_.

hearmlēoð † n. _elegy, lamentation_.

hearmlic _harmful, grievous_, Æ.

hearmloca † m. _prison_: _hell_.

hearmplega m. _fight, strife_, #Gen# 1898.

hearmscaða m. _terrible enemy_, B 766.

hearmscearu † f. _affliction, punishment, penalty_. [sceran]
  [[under “scieran”]]

hearmslege m. _grievous blow_, #Cr# 1435.

hearmsprǣc f. _calumny_, WW 198^3.

hearmstæf † m. _harm, sorrow, tribulation_.

hearmtān m. _shoot of sorrow_, #Gen# 992.

hearpe (æ) f. ‘_harp_,’ _Æ, VPs_; CP.

hearpenægel m. _plectrum_.

hearpere (a) m. _harper_, _Bo, Ln_; Æ, CP.

hearpestre f. _(female) harper_, WW 190^6.

hearpestreng m. ‘_harp-string_,’ _ApT_.

hearpian _to ‘harp,’_ _Bo_; Æ.

hearpnægel = hearpenægel

hearpsang m. _psalm_, WW 129^40.

hearpslege m. _plectrum (instrument for striking the harp)_, OEG:
_harp-playing_.

hearpswēg m. _sound of the harp_, #BlPs# 150^3.

hearpung f. ‘_harping_,’ _Bo_.

hearra † (æ, e, ie, eo) m. _lord, master_, _Chr_ (æ), _Gen_. [‘_her_’;
_Ger._ herr]

hēarra = hēahra (v. hēah)

hearstepanne = hierstepanne  [[under “hierste”]]

hēarsum = hiersum  [[headword spelled “hīersum”]]

heart (NG) == heord, heorot

-hearwa v. Sigel-h.

hēas v. hēah.

heascan = hyscan

heasu = hasu

heaðo- = heaðu- (= _war_)

heaðor † n. _restraint, confinement_.

±heaðorian (e^2) _to shut in, restrain, control_.

hēaðrym = hēahðrymm

heaðubyrne † f. _war-corslet_.

heaðudēor † _bold, brave_.

heaðufremmende _fighting_, #El# 130.

heaðufȳr † n. _cruel fire_.

heaðugeong _young in war_, #Fin# 2.

heaðugiemm m. _wound got in battle_, #Rd# 57^3.

heaðugrim † _fierce_.

heaðulāc † n. _battle-play, battle_.

heaðulind f. _shield of linden wood_, †#Chr# 937.

hēaðulīðende † m. _seafaring warrior_.

heaðumǣre _famed in battle_, B 2802.

heaðurǣs † m. _onrush, attack_.

heaðurēaf n. _war-gear_, B 401.

heaðurinc † m. _warrior_.

heaðurōf † _famed in war, brave_.

heaðusceard? _dinted in war_, B 2830? (or ? heaðuscearp _battle-sharp_).

heaðusēoc _wounded_, B 2754.

heaðusigel m. _sun_, #Rd# 72^16.

heaðustēap † _towering in battle_.

heaðuswāt † m. _blood of battle_.

heaðusweng m. _battle-stroke_, B 2581.

heaðutorht _clear as a battle-cry_, B 2553.

heaðuwǣd f. _armour_, B 39.

heaðuweorc n. _battle-deed_, B 2892.

heaðuwērig _weary from fighting_, #Wald# 2^17.

heaðuwylm † (æ^3, e^3) m. _fierce flame_.

hēaum = hēagum dp. of hēah.

+hēaw n. _gnashing, grinding_.

hēaw- = hǣw- (hēawi, Cp 303#c# = hǣwen)

±hēawan^7 _to ‘hew,’ hack, strike, cleave, cut, cut down, kill_, _Æ, BH,
Chr, Jud, LL_: _make by hewing_, _A_. æftan h. _to slander_, W 160^4.

heawen (K) = heofon

-hēawere v. hrīðer-, wudu-h.

-hebba v. hēafod-h.

±hebban^6 (æ) pres. 3 sg. hōf, pl. hōfon, pp. hafen (hæfen) (wk. forms
in LWS, pret. hefde, pp. hefod) _to ‘heave,’ raise, lift, lift up,
exalt_, _Æ, B, Bl, Ps_; CP: intr. _rise_, W 100^3.

hebbe = hæbbe v. habban.

-hebbe, -hebbing v. ūp-h.

hebbendlic _exalted_, DR 181^14.

hebeld = hefeld

heben = heofon

heber = hæfer

hebuc = hafoc

hecc = hæc

heced = hacod

hēcen n. _kid_, ES 35·332; NC 357.

hecg (#Chr# 547#e#?) = hege

hecga-spind, -swind = hagospind

±hēdan I. (w. g.) _to ‘heed,’ observe_, _B, LL_; Æ: _look after, care
for, guard, protect, take charge of_: _obtain, receive, take_, _Æ_. II.
= hȳdan

hedclāð m. _a coarse, thick, upper garment like a chasuble_, #Lcd#
1·346^17.

hēddern (ȳ) n. _storehouse_.

hēde pret. 3 sg. of hēgan.

heden m. _robe, hood, chasuble_, LL.

hedendlic _captious_, OEG 3208. adv. -līce, WW 199^1.

hefaldian = hefeldian

hefde I. (#VPs#) = hæfde pret. 3 sg. of habban. II. v. hebban.

hefe (æ) m. _weight, burden_, Æ: ‘_mina, talentum_,’ GPH 396.

hefeful _severe_, RB 49^18.

hefeg == hefig

hefeld m. _weaver’s beam_, _Gl_. [v. ‘_heald_’]

±hefeldian (a^2) _to fix the weft, begin the web_, #Gl#.

hefeldðrǣd m. _thread (for weaving)_, #Gl#.

hefelgyrd (e^3) f. _‘liciatorium,’ weaver’s shuttle_, #Gl#.

hefelic = hefiglic

hefelīce = hefiglīce

hefen I. (æ) f. _burden, load_? RB 49^13. II. = heofon

hefetīme = hefigtīme  [[under “hefigtȳme”]]

hefeð pres. 3 sg. of hebban.

hefgian = hefigian

hefig (æ) ‘_heavy_,’ _Met, Mt_: _important, grave, severe, serious_, _A,
Bl, Mt_: _oppressive, grievous_, _Ps, LL_. [hebban] adv. hefige, _Ps_.

±hefigian _to make heavy_, _VPs_: _weigh down, oppress, afflict,
grieve_, _BH, CP, Mt_: _aggravate, increase_: _become heavy, depressed,
weakened_, _CP, Gu_. [‘_heavy_’]

hefiglic _weighty, serious, severe, burdensome, grievous, sad_, Æ. adv.
-līce, _Æ, CP, G_. [‘_heavily_’]

hefigmōd _oppressive_, #ERPs# 54^4.

hefignes (æ) f. _‘heaviness,’ weight, burden, affliction_, _MtL_; CP:
_dulness, torpor_, _Bo_ (æ).

hefigtȳme (ī^3) _grievous, severe, troublesome, oppressive_, Æ. [tēam]

hefigtȳmnes f. _trouble_, Æ.

hefod wk. pp., hefð pres. 3 sg. of hebban.

hefon = heofon

heft- = hæft-

hefug = hefigu pl. of hefig, CP 285^1.

hēg == hīeg

±hēgan † _to perform, achieve_: _hold (a meeting)_.

hegdig = hygdig

hege (ea) m. _‘hedge,’ fence_, _Æ, Gl_; Mdf.

hegeclife f. _hedge-clivers_, #Lcd# 20a.

hegegian = hegian

hegehymele f. _hop-plant_, WW 302^5.

hegel (#VPs#) = hægl, hagol

hegerǣw f. ‘_hedgerow_,’ _KC_ (ē^3).

hegerife f. _cleavers, goose grass_, _Lcd_. [‘_hairif_’]

hegesāhl m. _hedge-stake_, GD 24^28.

hegessugge _hedge-sparrow_, _WW_. [sucga; ‘_haysugge_’]

±hegian _to fence in, hedge, enclose_, _Sc_. grep h. _to cut a grip_, LL
455[13]. [‘_hay_’]

hēgnes = hēanes

hegstæf m. _fence, enclosure_, WW 205^31.

hegstald- = hægsteald-

hēh (#VPs#, N) = hēah

hēh- = hēah-

+hēhan (VHy) = hēan III.

hē hē indicates laughter, _ÆGr_. [‘_he_’]

hehstald = hagosteald

hehstald- = hægsteald-

hēht pret. 3 sg. of hātan.

hēhðu = hīehðu

+heige (#KGl# 83^40) = +hæge

hēista = hēhsta v. hēah.

hēiweg m. _highway_? EC 130´.

hel == hell

hēla (ǣ) m. ‘_heel_,’ _JnL, Lcd, OET, WW_.

±helan^4 _to conceal, cover, hide_, _AO, VPs_; CP. [‘_hele_’; _Ger._
hehlen]

hēlan I. (oe) _to calumniate_, MtR 5^44. II. = hǣlan I.

held I. = hyld, hyldo. II. = hield

heldan = hieldan

helde I. f. _tansy_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ. [‘_helde_’] II. = hyldo

hele f. _subterfuge_, _LL_ (320^17). [‘_hele_’]

hele- = helle-, ele-

hēlend = hǣlend

helerung = heolorung

heleð = hæleð

helf- = healf-, hielf-

helfan _to halve_, Cp 303#b#? (herbid).

helgod = hellgod

helhrūne = hellerūne

±helian _to conceal, cover, hide_, _Æ, LL_. [‘_hele_’]

hēlic = hēahlic

hēlīce = hēalīce

hell f. _Hades_, _Æ, VPs_: _‘hell,’ infernal regions, place of torment,
Gehenna_, _Bo, RB_; AO, CP, Æ. [helan]

hellbend mf. _bond of hell_, B 3072.

hellcniht m. _devil, demon_, ÆL 3^372.

hellcræft m. _hellish power_, #An# 1104.

hellcund _of hell_, W 254^15.

hellcwalu † f. _pains of hell_.

helldor † n. _gate of hell_.

hellebealu n. _hell-bale_, #Cr# 1427.

hellebrōga m. _terror of hell_, #LPs#.

hellebryne m. _hell-fire_, #Jud#, W.

hellecǣgan pl. _keys of hell_, MFH 128.

helleceafl m. _jaws of hell_, #An# 1702.

hellecinn n. _hellish race_, #Cr# 1620.

helleclamm m. _hell-bond_, #Gen# 373.

helledēofol † mn. _devil_.

helle-dor ‡ n., -duru ‡ f. _gate of hell_.

helleflōr m. _floor of hell, courts of hell_, #Sat# 70.

hellefȳr n. _hell-fire_.

hellegǣst (a^3) m. _spirit of hell_.

hellegeat n. _gate of hell_, ÆH 1·288, MP 1·610.

hellegrund † m. _abyss of hell_.

hellegrut m. _pit of hell_, OEG 684.

hellegryre m. _horror of hell_, #Sat# 433.

helle-hæft ‡, -hæfta ‡, -hæftling † m. _prisoner of hell, devil_.

hellehēaf m. _wailings or howlings of hell_, #Gen# 38.

hellehinca m. _hell-limper, devil_, #An# 1173. [cp. _Ger._ hinken]

hellehund m. _hell-hound_, KC 3·350^18.

hellehūs n. _hell-house_, #Gu# 649.

hellelic = hellic

helleloc n. _hell-prison_, GD 325^30.

hellemægen n. _troop of hell_, MFH 166.

hellemere m. _Stygian lake_, WW.

hellenīð m. _torments of hell_, #Gen# 775.

hellerūne f. _pythoness, sorceress_, Æ.

hellescealc m. _devil_, #Sat# 133.

hellesceaða = hellsceaða

hellesēað m. _pit of hell_.

hellestōw f. _infernal region, hell_, GD 332^10.

hellesūsl n. _hell-torment_, Æ.

helleðegn (hel-) † m. _devil_.

hellewīte n. _hell-pains, torment_, Æ.

hellewītebrōga m. _horror of hell-torment_, W 151^21.

hellfiren f. _hellish crime_, #Part# 6.

hellfūs † _bound for hell_.

hellgeðwing n. _confinement in hell_. #Gen# 696.

hellgod n. _god of the lower world_.

hellheort _terrified_, NC 301.

hellheoðo f. _vault of hell, hell_, #Sat# 700 (or ? two words).

hellic _hellish_, _Æ_. [‘_hellick_’]

hellsceaða m. _hell-foe, devil_: ‘_infernus_.’

hell-træf, nap. -trafu n. _devil’s temple_, #An# 1693.

helltrega m. _hell-torture_, #Gen# 73.

hell-waran, -ware mp., -waru fp. _dwellers in hell_, Æ.

hellwerod n. _host of hell_, W.

hellwiht (hel-) fn. _devil_, W 186^2.

helm m. _protection, defence, covering, crown_, _Æ, Rd_: _summit, top
(of trees)_, _Æ, Bo, WW_; CP: _helmet_, _Cp, WW_: (†) _protector, lord_.
[‘_helm_’]

helma m. _‘helm,’ rudder_, _Bo, Cp, WW_; Æ.

helm-bǣre, -berende _leafy_.

helmberend m. † _helmeted warrior_.

±helmian (y) _to cover, crown_, _An_: _provide with a helmet_, _ÆGr_.
[‘_helm_’; ‘_i-helmed_’]

-helmig v. lēaf-h.

helmiht _leafy_, WW 395^5; 493^28.

helmweard (holm-) m. _pilot_, #An# 359.

hēlo = hǣlu

helor = heolor

help (y) fm. _‘help,’ succour, aid_, _AO, B, Bl_.

helpan^3 (w. g. or d.) _to ‘help,’ support, succour_, _Æ, CP, Ct, G, LL,
Ps_: _benefit, do good to_, _Lcd_ (intr.), _LL_: _cure, amend_, _Mk_.

helpe f. = help

helpend m. ‘_helper_,’ _Bl_.

helpendlic _auxiliary_.

helrūn = helleruna  [[headword spelled “hellerūne”]]

helrūna m. _hellish monster_, B 163.

helrȳnegu f. _sorceress, witch_, WW 472^11.

hēlspure f. _heel_, #VPs#.

helt I. = hilt. II. pres. 3 sg. of heldan. III. (#KGl#) = hielt pres. 3
sg. of healdan.

helðegn = helleðegn

helur == heolor

hem m. _‘hem,’ border_, _WW_ 125^13.

+hēme? _customary_? AS 32^24.

hemed (BC 2·522´) v. hemman.

hēmed = hǣmed

hēmeð = hǣmed

hemeðe _under-garment_. [_Ger._ hemd]

hemlic (Æ) = hymlic

hemman _to stop up, close_, #PPs# 106^42. [_MHG._ hemmen]

hemming m. _shoe of undressed leather_, _WW_ 468^31. [‘_heming_’]

hen == henn

hēn = hēan

hēn- = hīen-

hēnan = hīenan

+hendan _to hold_, #PPs# 138^8. [hand]

+hende _near, at hand_, _Æ, Mk_: _handy, convenient_, _AO_. adv. _near,
at home_, _Æ_. [‘_hend_’]

-hendig v. list-h.

+hendnes f. _neighbourhood, proximity_, Æ.

henep = hænep

heng pret. 3 sg. of hōn.

hengeclif n. _overhanging cliff_, WW 180^4.

hengen f. _hanging_, Æ: _cross_, Æ: _rack, torture_, Æ: _imprisonment_.

hengenwītnung f. _imprisonment_, LL 471[16].

hengest, hengst m. _stallion, steed, horse, gelding_, _Ct, WW_; Æ.
[‘_hengest_’]

hengetrēow (enge-) n. _gallows_, GPH 395.

hengwīte n. _fine for not detaining an offender_, LL 496[4].

henn (æ) f. ‘_hen_’ _A, Mt, Lcd_.

henna m. _fowl_, LL (220^13).

hennebelle (æ) f. _henbane_.

hennfugol m. _hen_, Ct.

hentan _to pursue, attack_, _LL_; Æ: (±) _appropriate, seize_, _Chr_.
[‘_hent_,’ ‘_i-hente_’]

hēnð = hȳnð

hēnðu = hȳnðu  [[under “hȳnð”]]

henu = heonu

hēo I. nasf. and nap. of pron. 3 pers. _‘she,’ they_. II. † = hīew

hēodæg adv. _to-day_, #Gen# 661. [_Ger._ heute]

hēof I. m. _wailing, mourning, grief_, Æ, AO. II. str. pret. 3 sg. of
hēofan.

hēofan^{7?} (pret. hēof, hōf, hēofon) _to lament_, CP.

heofen = heofon

hēofendlic _dismal, mournful_, WW. adv. -līce.

±hēof-ian, -igian _to lament_, Æ.

heofig- = hefig-

hēofigendlic _mourning, lamenting_, A 10·146; 188.

hēoflic _lamentable_.

hēofod == hēafod

heofog (#Bl#) == hefig

heofon (e) mf. (often in pl.) _sky, firmament_, _Æ, Bo, VPs_: ‘_heaven_’
_Æ, Mt_: _the power of heaven_, _Mt, Lk_.

hēofon I. f. _lamentation_? #Ex# 46. II. str. pret. pl. of hēofan.

heofonbeacen n. _sign in the sky_, #Ex# 107.

heofonbeorht † _heavenly bright_.

heofonbiggende ‘_cælebs_,’ DHy. [_ON._ byggja]

heofonbȳme f. _heavenly trumpet_, #Cr# 949.

heofoncandel † f. _light of the heavens, sun, moon, stars_.

heofoncenned _heaven-born_, DHy 108^4.

heofoncolu npl. _heat of the sun_, #Ex# 71.

heofoncund _celestial, heavenly_, CP.

heofoncundlic _heavenly_, W.

heofoncyning m. _king of heaven, Christ_, _Bl_ 201. [‘_heavenking_’]

heofondēma m. _heavenly ruler_, #Sat# 658.

hēofondlīce = hēofendlīce

heofondrēam † m. _joy of heaven_.

heofonduguð f. _heavenly host_, #Cr# 1655.

heofone (Æ, W) = heofon

heofonengel m. † _angel of heaven_.

heofonfugol † m. _fowl of the air_.

heofonfȳr n. _fire from heaven_, W 262^15.

heofonhālig _holy and heavenly_, #An# 728.

heofonhām † m. _heavenly home_.

heofonhēah _reaching to heaven_, _Da_ 553. [‘_heavenhigh_’]

heofonheall f. _heavenly hall_, LL (382^10).

heofonhlāf ‡ m. _bread of heaven, manna_.

heofonhrōf m. †_vault of heaven, heaven_: _roof, ceiling_.

heofonhwealf † f. _vault of heaven_.

heofonhyrst f. _ornament of the heavens_, #Gen# 2189.

heofonisc (e^2) _heavenly_, AO 1^6.

heofonlēoht n. _heavenly light_, #An# 976.

heofonlēoma m. _heavenly light_, #An# 840.

heofonlic _‘heavenly,’ celestial_, _Bl_; Lk. adv. -līce, #ÆGr#, DHy.

heofonmægen † n. _heavenly force_.

heofonrīce n. _kingdom of heaven_, _Bl, Cr_; AO. [‘_heavenric_’]

heofonsetl n. _throne of heaven_, DD 277.

heofonsteorra † m. _star of heaven_.

heofonstōl m. _throne of heaven_, #Gen# 8.

heofontimber n. _heavenly structure_, #Gen# 146.

heofontorht † _very bright, glorious_.

heofontungol † n. _heavenly luminary_.

heofonðrēat m. _heavenly company_, #Sat# 222.

heofonðrymm m. _heavenly glory_.

heofon-ware, -waran mp., -waru fp. _inhabitants of heaven_, _Æ_.
[‘_heavenware_’]

heofonwealdend (e^2) ‘_arcitenens_,’ OEG 23^10.

heofonweard † m. _heaven’s keeper, God_.

heofonwerod n. _heavenly host_, W.

heofonwlitig _divinely fair_, NC 301.

heofonwolcen † n. _cloud of heaven_.

heofonwōma † m. _terrible noise from heaven_.

heofonwuldor n. _heavenly glory_, †Hy 6^12.

hēofsið m. _lamentable state_, #Rim# 43? [hēof]

heofun = heofon

hēofung f. _lamentation, mourning_, Æ.

hēofungdæg m. _day of mourning_, Æ.

hēofungtīd f. _time of mourning_, Æ.

heolan = helan

heold pret. 3 sg. of healdan.

heoldan = healdan

heolfor † n. _gore, blood_.

heolfrig † _gory, bloody_.

heolor (e^1, e^2, u^2) f. _scales, balance_.

heolorbledu (e^1, u^2) f. _the scale of a balance_, WW 427^35.

heolorian _to weigh, ponder_, #Gl#.

heolorung (e^1, e^2) f. _‘momentum,’ the turning of a scale_, WW 450^12.

heoloðcynn n. _denizens of hell_, #Cr# 1542.

-hēoloðe v. hēah-h.  [[headword spelled “hēahhēolode”]]

heoloðhelm † (æ) m. _helmet which makes the wearer invisible_.

heolp = healp

heolr- = heolor-

heolstor (e^2) I. m. _darkness, concealment, cover, hiding-place,
retreat_. [helan] II. adj. _dark, shadowy_, Æ.

heolstorcofa m. _dark chamber, grave_, #Ph# 49.

heolstorhof n. _hell_, #El# 764.

heolstorloca † m. _prison, cell_.

heolstor-sceado ‡ f., -scuwa ‡ m. _concealing shade, darkness_.

heolstrig _shadowy, obscure_, WW.

heolt = healt

heom dp. of hē, hēo, hit.

heona (_LkL_), heonan, _VPs_ (io), heonane (_Gen_) = heonon(e)

heono (NG) = heonu

heonon, heonone _hence, from here, away_, _Mt_: _from now_. h. forð
_henceforth_. [‘_hen_’]

heononsið m. _departure, death_, #Dom# 86, #Bk# 21.

heononweard _transient_.

heonu (an(n)a, āne, eno, (he)ono) _if, but, therefore, moreover,
whether_, ANS 91·205.

heonun (_Mt_) = heonon

hēop (#LPs# 67^14) = hēap

hēopbremel (y^2) m. _dog-rose, bramble_, _Lcd_. [v. ‘_hip_’]

hēope f. _‘hip,’ seed-vessel of wild-rose_, _Cp, Lcd, WW_; Æ: _bush,
brier_.

heor = heorr

heora gp. of hē, hēo, hit.

hēoran = hīeran

heorcnian (e, y) tr. and intr. _to ‘hearken,’ listen_, _Æ, Guth_.

heorcnung f. _‘hearkening,’ listening, power of hearing_, _Æ_.

heord I. (e, io) f. _‘herd,’ flock_, _Æ, Mt, WW_; CP: _keeping, care,
custody_, CP. II. _sycamore_, LkR 19^4. [heorot-?] III. = hīred

heordan pl. _‘hards’ (of flax), tow_, _Cp, WW_.

heorde I. (#VPs#) == hierde. II. = heord

±heordnes f. _custody, keeping, watch_.

heordrǣden f. _custody, care, keeping, watch, ward_, ÆL(y^1).

+heordung f. _guard, watch_, #ERPs# 38^2.

hēore I. † (ȳ) _pleasant, secure_, _B_: _gentle, mild, pure_, _Gen_.
[‘_here_’] II. = hīere

  [[Cross-reference uncertain: may be form of “hīera”, see “hēah”.]]

heorl = eorl

heoro == heoru

hēorod = hīered

heorot m. _‘hart,’ stag_, _Bo_ (heort), _VPs_ (-ut).

heorotberge f. _buckthorn-berry_, WW.

heorotbrembel m. _buckthorn_, #Lcd#.

heorotbrēr f. _buckthorn_, LkR 17^6 (heart-).

heorotclǣfre f. _‘hart-clover,’ hemp agrimony_, _Lcd_.

heorotcrop m. _cluster of hartwort flowers_.

heorotsmeoru n. _hart’s grease_, #Lcd# 45a.

heorotsol n. _stag’s wallowing-place_, Ct.

heorr mf. _hinge_, _B, Bo, Cp, LPs_: _cardinal point_, _Lcd_.
[‘_harre_’]

heorra = (1) hearra; (2) heorr

heort I. (±) _high-minded, stout-hearted_, ÆL. II. == heorot

heortan = hiertan

heortancnys f. ‘_(com)pulsus cordis_’? v. ZDA 31·13n.

heortbucc m. _roebuck_, WW 119^12.

heortcoðu f. _heart disease_, #Lcd# 65b.

heorte f. _heart (organ)_, _Lcd, VPs_: _soul, spirit_, _A, B, G, RB,
VPs_: _will, desire_, _VPs_: _courage_, _Gen, VPs_: _intellect_, _Mt,
JnL_.

heortece m. _‘heartache,’ pain at the heart_, _Lcd_.

heorten (y) _of a hart_, #Lcd# 1·216^15.

heortgesida pl. _entrails_, Æ.

heortgryre m. _terror of heart_, W 86^15.

heorthama m. _pericardium, internal fat_, Æ.

heorthogu f. _heart-care_, W 177^7.

heortlēas _dispirited_, DD 124, W 137^22.

+heortlīce adv. _cheeringly_, GD 317^16.

heortlufu f. _hearty love_, †Hy 9^29.

heortscræf n. _heart_, DD 39.

heortsēoc _ill from heart disease_.

heortwærc m. _pain at the heart_, #Lcd#.

heorð (e) m. _‘hearth,’ fireplace_, _Gl, Az_: _house, home_, _Æ, LL_.

heorð- = eorð-

heorða I. m. _deer-_ (_or goat-_?) _skin_, WW 337^3. II. (#HGl# 483) =
heorda  [[form of “heardan”?]]

heorðbacen _baked on the hearth_, Æ.

heorðcneoht m. _attendant_, CP 361^18.

heorðfæst _having a settled home_, LL 322´.

heorðgenēat † m. _retainer_.

heorðpening m. _‘hearth-penny,’ tax (for the Church)_, _Peter’s penny_,
_LL_ (v. 2·506).

heorðswǣpe f. _bridesmaid_, Cp 701#p#.

heorðwerod † n. _body of retainers_.

heoru † m. _sword_.

heorublāc _mortally wounded_, B 2488?

heorucumbul n. _standard_, #El# 107.

heorudolg n. _deadly wound_, #An# 944.

heorudrēor † m. _sword-blood, gore_.

heorudrēorig † _blood-stained_: _dejected, crest-fallen_.

heorudrync m. _sword-drink, blood shed by the sword_, B 2358.

heorufæðm m. _deadly grasp_, #Ex# 504.

heoruflā f. _arrow_, #LPs# 56^5.

heorugīfre † _fierce, greedy for slaughter_.

heorugrǣdig † _bloodthirsty_.

heorugrimm † _savage, fierce_.

heoruhōciht _with formidable hooks, savagely barbed_, B 1438.

heorung = herung

heoruscearp _very sharp_, #Rd# 6^8.

heorusceorp n. _war equipments_, #Hell# 73.

heoruserce † f. _coat of mail_.

heoruswealwe f. _falcon, hawk_, #Wy# 186.

heorusweng † m. _sword-stroke_.

heorut = heorot

heoruwǣpen n. _sword_, #Jud# 263.

heoruweallende ‡ _gushing with destruction_.

heoruwearg m. _bloodthirsty wolf_, B 1267.

heoruword n. _hostile speech_, FT 84.

heoruwulf m. _warrior_, #Ex# 181.

hēow I. pret. 3 sg. of hēawan. II. = hīw

hēow- = hīw-

hēowan = hēofan

heplic = hæplic  [[only in form “hæplicnes”]]

her- = hear-, hier-

hēr I. adv. _‘here,’ in this place_, _Æ, G, VPs_: _in this world_, _Bl,
LL_: _at this point of time, at this date, now_, _Chr, Ct_: _towards
this place, hither_, _B_. II. = hǣr

hēr- = hǣr-, hīer-, hȳr-

hēræfter (ȳ) adv. _‘hereafter,’ later on_, _A, BH_.

hērbeforan adv. _before, previously_, W 52^11; FM 361^23.

hēr-beufan, -biufan adv. _here above, previously_, CP.

hērbūende † mp. _here-dwellers, dwellers on earth_.

herbyrg == herebeorg

hercnian = heorcnian

hērcyme m. _coming here, advent_, #Cr# 250.

herd = heord

herd- = hierd-

hērd- = hīerd-

here (obl. cases usu. have herg-, herig-) m. _predatory band, troop,
army, host, multitude_, _Chr, Mt_; AO, CP (‘se h.’ almost always = _the
Danish army_ in #Chr#): _battle, war, devastation_. [‘_here_’; _Ger._
heer]

hēre I. f. _dignity, majesty, importance_. II. (#VPs#) = hǣre

here-bēacen, -bēacn n. _military ensign, standard_: _beacon,
lighthouse_.

here-beorg, -byrg f. _lodgings, quarters_, NC 346. [_Ger._ herberge]

herebeorgian _to take up one’s quarters, lodge_, #Chr# 1048#f#. [_Ger._
herbergen]

hereblēað _cowardly_, #Ex# 453.

herebrōga m. _dread of war_, B 462.

herebȳme f. _trumpet, sackbut_.

herebyrgian = herebeorgian

herebyrne f. _corslet_, B 1443.

herecirm m. _war cry_, #Gu# 872.

herecist = herecyst

herecombol n. _standard_, #El# 25?

herecyst † f. _warlike band_.

+heredlic (#LPs# 105^2) = +hierendlic  [[headword spelled “hīerendlic”]]

herefeld † m. _battle-field, field_.

herefeoh n. _booty_, AO 118^5.

herefēða m. _war-troop_, #Cr# 1013.

hereflȳma (ē) ‡ m. _fugitive from battle, deserter_.

herefolc † n. _army_.

herefong m. _osprey_, WW.

herefugol m. _bird of prey, vulture, eagle_, #Ex# 161.

hereg- = herg-, herig-

heregang m. _incursion_, W 312^1.

here-geat fn. gp. -geat(w)e, -geat(w)a, -geatu _war-gear, military
equipment_, _Bo, Ma_: ‘_heriot_,’ _Ct, LL_ (v. 2·500).

heregeatland n. _heriot-land_, LL 220.

heregild (e, eo, y) n. _war-tax, Danegeld_, _Chr, Ct_. [‘_heregeld_’]

heregrīma † m. _helmet_.

herehand f. _violence of war_, BH 356^22.

herehlōð f. _war-host, troop_, #Gu# 1042.

here-hūð, -hȳð f. _booty, prey, plunder_, Æ, AO.

herelāf f. _remains of host_, Æ: _spoil_, Æ.

herelic _martial_, WW 374^26.

herelof mn. _fame, glory_, OEG.

heremæcg m. _warrior_, #Gen# 2483.

heremægen † n. _warlike force, multitude_.

heremann m. _soldier_, LkL 7^8.

hēremann = hīeremann  [[headword spelled “hīereman”]]

heremeðel n. _national assembly_, #El# 550.

herenes (æ) f. _praise_.

herenett n. _corslet_, B 1553.

herenīð m. _warfare_, B 2474.

herepād † f. _corslet, coat of mail_.

her(e)-pað, -pæð m. _military road, highway_, v. CC 46 and Mdf.

hererǣs m. _hostile raid_, W 271^2.

hererǣswa † m. _commander_.

hererēaf f. _war spoil, plunder, booty_, Æ.

hererinc † m. _warrior_.

heresceaft m. _spear_, B 335.

heresceorp n. _war-dress_, #Fin# 45.

heresīð † m. _warlike expedition_.

herespēd f. _success in war_, B 64.

hērespel n. _discourse_, #Creat# 77.

herestrǣl m. _arrow_, B 1435.

herestrǣt f. _highway, main road_, CP 375^9 and #n# (LL 556, 10, 2).

hereswēg m. _martial sound_, #Ruin# 23.

heresyrce f. _corslet_, B 1511.

heretēam m. _plunder, devastation_: _predatory excursion_.

here-tēma, -tȳma m. _army leader, general, king, ruler_.

here-toga, -toha m. _commander, general, chieftain_, _Æ, BH_; AO, CP.
[‘_heretoga_’; _Ger._ herzog]

hereðrēat † m. _war-band, troop_.

hereðrym m. _phalanx_, WW 411^34.

herewǣd f. _mail, armour_, B 1897.

herewǣpen n. _weapon_, #PPs# 34^3.

herewæsma m. _prowess_, B 677.

herewǣða † m. _warrior_.

hereweg m. _highway_, WW 146^33.

hereweorc n. _war-work_, #El# 656.

herewian = hierwan

herewīc n. _dwellings, camp_, #Bl#.

herewīsa † m. _captain, general_.

herewōp m. _the cry of an army_, #Ex# 460.

hereword n. _praise, renown_, #Chr# 1009#f#.

herewōsa † m. _warrior_.

herewulf m. _warrior_, #Gen# 2015.

herewurd (#HGl# 423) = hereword

herfest = hærfest

herg = hearg

herg- = herg-, hereg-, heri(g)-

hergað m. _harrying, plundering, devastation_.

hergere m. _one who praises_, _DR_. [‘_heryer_’]

±hergian _to ravage, plunder, lay waste, ‘harry,’_ _AO, Chr_; Æ, CP.
[‘_harrow_’; here]

hergoð = hergað

hergung (AO), hergiung f. _‘harrying,’ ravaging, raid, invasion,
attack_, _BH, Chr_: _plunder, booty_: ‘_harrowing_,’ _Æ_.

herh = hearg

herian I. _to extol, praise, commend_, _Æ, AO, CP, VPs_ (æ). [‘_hery_’]
II. = hierwan. III. = hergian. IV. = erian

herig == hearg; v. also here.

herigendlic _laudable, commendable_, Æ. adv. -līce.

hering = herung

hērinne adv. ‘_herein_,’ _Æ_.

herlic = herelic

hērof adv. _‘hereof,’ of this_, _A_.

hēron adv. _herein_, _Ct_; LL. [‘_hereon_’]

hērongean adv. _contrarily, in opposition_, W 52^8.

hērongemong _at this point, in this connection, meanwhile_, CP: _among
others_, CP.

her-pað, -poð = herepað

hērra = hēarra, hīerra (v. hēah)

herst- = hierst-

hērsum == hīersum

hērtō _thus far_, OEG 56^80.

hērtōēacan _besides_, W.

herð = heorð

herðan pl. ‘_testiculi_,’ LL 84[65].

herðbelig m. ‘_scrotum_,’ WW.

herðland (NC 357) = yrðland

herung (eo) f. _praise_, _Æ, CP_. [‘_herying_’]

herutbeg (OEG 54^2) = heorotberge

herw- = hierw-, hirw-

herwið adv. ‘_herewith_,’ _EC_ 236.

hes- = hys-

hēst = hǣst

hēt pret. 3 sg. of hātan.

hetan _to attack_, ÆL 35^280.

hete (ea) m. _‘hate,’ envy, malice, hostility, persecution_, _B, BH,
VPs_; Æ, AO, CP.

hetegrim † _fierce, cruel_.

hetel == hetol

hetelic _hostile, malignant, horrible, violent, excessive_, _AO, B_.
[‘_hatelich_’] adv. -līce, _Æ_. [‘_hately_’]

hetend = hettend

hetenīð † m. _hostility, spite, wickedness_.

heterōf _full of hate_, #An# 1422.

heterūn f. _charm which produces hate_, #Rd# 34^7.

hetesprǣc f. _defiant speech_, #Gen# 263.

hetesweng m. _hostile blow_, B 2225.

heteðanc † m. _hostile design_.

heteðoncol _hostile_, #Jul# 105.

hetol _hating, hostile, evil_, Æ, W: _violent, severe_, RB 67^16.

hetolnes (e^2) f. _fierceness_, OEG 11^152.

hēton pret. pl. of hātan.

hētt (AO) = hǣt pres. 3 sg. of hātan.

hettend † m. _enemy, antagonist_.

hettende pres. part. of hatian.

hēðen = hǣðen

hēwen = hǣwen

hī = hēo, hīe

hicemāse f. _blue titmouse_, WW 132^24.

hicgan = hycgan

hicol m. _woodpecker_, BC 1·47 (Mdf).

hīd I. fn. _a ‘hide’ of land (about 120 acres, but amount varied
greatly)_, _BH, LL_, v. EC pp 457-461 and LL 2·513. [hīwan] II. = hȳd

hīdan = hȳdan

hidenofer adv. _hither_.

hider adv. _‘hither,’ to this side, on this side_, _Æ, Cp, VPs_. comp.
hideror _nearer_. h. and ðider (_Cp, CP_), hidres ðidres (ðædres), _Bo_,
_hither and thither_.

hidercyme m. _advent, arrival_, _BH_. [‘_hithercome_’]

hidergeond adv. _thither, yonder_.

hiderryne adj. _directed hither_.

hidertōcyme = hidercyme

hiderweard adj. and adv. _‘hitherward,’ towards this place_, _Chr_.

hīdgild I. n. _tax paid on each hide of land_, _Ct_. [‘_hidegeld_’] II.
= hȳdgild

hidir- = hider-

hīdmǣlum adv. _by hides_, KC 6·98^4.

hidres v. hider.

hīe I. nap. of hē, hēo, hit. [‘_hi, hy_’] II. = hēo nasf. of hē.
[‘_hi, hy_’]

hieder = hider

hīeg (ē, ī) n. _‘hay,’ cut grass_, _G, Lcd, VPs_. [hēawan]

hīeghūs (ē, ī) n. _hay store_, _WW_. [‘_hay-house_’]

hīegian (CP) = hīgian

hīegsīðe (ē) m. _hay-scythe_, GD 37^13.

hīehra, hīehst [‘_highest_’] v. hēah.

hīehðu (ē, ēa, ȳ) f. (often indecl.) _‘height,’ highest point, summit_,
_Sc_: _the heavens, heaven_, _Cr, El, Gu, Sc_: _glory_. [hēah]

±hield (æ, ea, eo, i, y) f. (usu. +) _keeping, custody, guard,
protection_, CP: _observance, observation, watching_: _secret place_:
_protector, guardian_.

±hieldan (e, y) intr. _to lean, incline, slope_, _Bo_ (e): tr. _force
downwards, bow or bend down_, _B, Lk_ (y). [‘_hield_’]

-hielde (y) v. earfoð-h.  [[under “earfoðhylde”]]

hielf (e, y) m. _handle_, _CP, WW_. [‘_helve_’]

hielfling (e) m. _mite, farthing_, LkL 12^6. [healf]

hiellan _to make a noise_, #EPs# 82^3.

hielpeð pres. 3 sg. of helpan.

hielt pres. 3 sg. of healdan.

-hieltan (y) v. ā-h. [healt]  [[under “āhyltan”]]

hielto f. _lameness_, MH 116^10 (e, y).

±hīenan (ǣ, ē, ȳ) _to fell, prostrate_: _weaken, crush, afflict, injure,
oppress_: _abase, humble, insult_, _B, LkL_: (+) _accuse, condemn_, CP.
[‘_hean_’]

hiene as. of hē. [‘_hin_’]

+hīene (ē) _ready to fall_, DR 189^16.

hīenend (e^1) m. _accuser_, JnL p5^9.

hīenðo (ǣ, ē, ȳ) f. _humiliation, affliction, oppression, annoyance_,
CP: _loss, damage, harm_: _act of hanging_, DHy 59^7.

hiera gp. of hē, hēo, hit. [‘_her_’]

hīera = hīerra v. hēah.

±hīeran (ē, ēo, ī, ȳ) tr. and intr. _to ‘hear,’ listen (to)_, _B, Mt,
Jul, VPs_: (w. d.) _obey, follow_, _Æ, Mk_; CP: _accede to, grant_,
_Bl_: _be subject to, belong to_, _A, AO, B, Ct_.

±hierdan (i, y) _to harden, make hard_: _strengthen, fortify, confirm,
encourage_, CP. [heard]

hierde (eo, i, y) m. _shepherd, herdsman_, _CP, G_: _guardian, keeper_,
_B, Bl, Gen, Met, WW_: _pastor_. [‘_herd_’]

hierdebōc f. _pastoral book_ (translation of the _Cura Pastoralis_ of
Pope Gregory), CP.

hierdebelig (e) m. _shepherd’s bag_, #Bl# 31^17.

hierdecnapa (y) m. _shepherd boy_, ÆL 23^418.

hierdelēas (i, y) _without a shepherd or pastor_, _Æ_. [‘_herdless_’]

hierdelic (y) _pastoral_, CP.

hierdeman m. _shepherd_, _Æ_ (y). [‘_herdsman_’]

hierdewyrt (i) f. _name of a plant_, #Lcd#.

±hierdnes (eo, i, y) f. _custody, watch, guard_.

hierdung (y) f. _strengthening, restoring_, WW 150^34.

hiere gds. of hēo. [‘_her_’]

hīered = hīred

hīereman (ē, ī, ȳ) m. _retainer, servant, subject, hearer, parishioner_,
CP. [hīeran]

+hīerend m. _hearer_, CP.

+hīerendlic ‘_auditus_,’ #LPs# 142^8 (ē^1); ‘_audiendus_,’ #ÆGr#
152^6 (ȳ).

+hīering (ē) f. _hearing, hearsay_, #LPs# 111^7.

hīeringman (e^1) m. _subject_, A 11·377^149.

hīernes (ē, ȳ) f. (+) _hearing, report_: (±) _obedience, subjection,
allegiance_, CP: _jurisdiction, district_.

hierra = hearra

hīerra v. hēah. [‘_higher_’]

±hierstan (e, i, y) _to fry, roast, scorch, pain_, CP. [cp. _OHG._
giharsten]

hierste (e, y) f. hierstepanne (ea, y) f. _frying-pan_, CP.

hiersting (y) f. _frying, burning_, CP.

hierstinghlāf (e) m. _crust_, WW 372^18.

±hīersum (ē, ēa, ī, ȳ) w. d. _obedient, docile_, _BH_ (ȳ), _Gu_ (ēa).
[‘_hearsum_’]

±hīersumian (i, y) w. d. _to obey, serve_, _BH_ (ēa), _Mt_ (ȳ); AO: (+)
_reduce, subject, conquer_, #Chr#. [‘_hearsum_’]

±hīersumnes (ī, ȳ) f. _obedience, submission_, _BH_ (ȳ); CP.
[‘_hersumnesse_’]

±hiertan (e, eo, y) _to cheer, encourage_, _CP_; Æ. [‘_heart_’; heort]

±hierwan (e, i, y) _to abuse, blaspheme, condemn, illtreat_: _to deride,
despise_.

hierwend (i) m. _blasphemer_.

hierwendlic _contemptible_. adv. -līce (e) _with contempt_.

hierwing (y) f. _blasphemy_, #Sc# 137^12.

hierwnes (i, y) f. _contempt, reproach_: _blasphemy_, W 70^12.

hīew == hīw

hīewestān m. _hewn stone_, AO 212^10.

hīewet (ȳ) n. _cutting_, CP. [hēawan]

hīewian = hīwian

hīewð (CP) pres. 3 sg. of hēawan.

hīf- (v. OEG 3913) = hīw-

hig = hīe I.

hīg == hīeg

hīgan = hīwan

hige == hyge

hīgendlīce _quickly, immediately_, MF (Vesp. D xiv). [hīgian]

higera m., higere f. _jay, magpie, jackdaw, woodpecker_. [_Ger._ häher]

higgan = hycgan

hīgian _to ‘hie,’ exert oneself, strive, hasten_, _Bl, Bo, CP_.

hīgid = hīd

hīglā ‘_heu!_’ #RPs# 119^5.

higlēast = hygelēast

hīgna v. hīwan.

hīgo (N) = hīwan

higora = higera

higre = higere  [[under “higera”]]

hīgscipe = hīwscipe

hīgð f. _exertion, effort_, _ZDA_. [‘_hight_’]

hīgung f. _effort_, GD 254^34.

hihsan = hyscan

hiht == hyht

hihting f. _exultation, gladness_, WW 233^42.

hīhðo = hīehðu

hilc = hylc

hild I. † f. _war, battle, combat_. II. = hield, hyldo

hildbedd n. _deathbed_, #An# 1094.

hildebill † n. _sword_.

hildeblāc _deadly pale_, B 2488.

hildebord † n. _buckler_.

hildecalla m. _war-herald_, #Ex# 252.

hildecorðor n. _warlike band_, #Ap# 41.

hildecyst f. _valour_, B 2598.

hildedēoful n. _demon_, #PPs# 95^5.

hildedēor _war-fierce, brave_, Æ.

hildefreca † m. _warrior_.

hildefrōfor f. _war-help, sword_? _shield_? #Wald# 2^12.

hildegeatwe † fp. _war-harness_.

hildegesa m. _terror of battle_, #El# 113.

hildegicel m. _battle-icicle (blood dripping from a sword)_, B 1606.

hildegiest m. _enemy_, #Rd# 54^9.

hildegrædig † _eager for battle_.

hildegrāp † f. _hostile grip_.

hildeheard _bold in battle_, #Ap# 21.

hildehlem † m. _crash of battle_.

hildelēoma † m. _Gleam of battle_ (name of a sword), B.

hildelēoð n. _war-song_, #Jud# 211.

hildemēce m. _sword_, B 2202.

hildemecg m. _warrior_, B 799.

hildenǣdre † f. _war-snake, arrow_.

hildepīl † m. _dart, javelin_.

hilderǣs m. _charge, attack_, B 300.

hilderand m. _shield_, B 1242.

hilderinc † m. _warrior, hero_.

hildesæd _battle-worn_, B 2723.

hildesceorp n. _armour_, B 2155.

hildescūr m. _shower of darts_, #Gu# 1116.

hildeserce f. _corslet_, #El# 234.

hildesetl m. _saddle_, B 1039.

hildespell n. _warlike speech_, #Ex# 573.

hildestrengo f. _vigour for battle_, B 2113.

hildeswāt m. _vapour of battle_? B 2558.

hildeswēg m. _sound of battle_, #Gen# 1991.

hildetorht _shining in battle_, #Met# 25^9.

hildetux m. _tusk (as weapon)_, B 1511.

hildeðremma m. _warrior_, #Jul# 64.

hildeðrymm ‡ m., hildeðrȳð ‡ f., _warlike strength, valour_.

hildewǣpen m. _weapon of war_, B 39.

hildewīsa m. _commander_, B 1064.

hildewōma † m. _crash of battle_.

hildewrǣsn f. _fetter for captives_, #Sol# 292.

hildewulf m. _hero_, #Gen# 2051.

hildfreca = hildefreca

hildfrom _valiant in war_, #An# 1204.

hildfruma † m. _battle-chief, prince, emperor_.

hildlata † m. _laggard in battle, coward_.

hildstapa m. _warrior_, #An# 1260.

hildðracu f. _onset of battle_, #Gen# 2157.

hileð = hilð

hilhāma = hyllehāma

hill = hyll, hell

hilman _helmet, cover_, #Gl#. [helm]

+hilman = helmian

hilpestu = hilpest ðu (pres. 2 sg. of helpan and pron. 2 pers. sing.)

hilpeð, hilpð pres. 3 sg. of helpan.

hilt I. pres. 3 sg. of healdan. II. mn. = hilte

hilte fn. _handle, ‘hilt’ (of sword)_, _B, WW_; (pl. = sg.) _Æ, B, Sol_.

hiltecumbor n. _banner with a staff_, B 1022 (or ? hilde-).

hilted _‘hilted,’ with a hilt_, _B_.

hilting m. _sword_, OEG 758.

hiltlēas _having no hilt_, WW 142^34.

±hiltu np. (as sg.) _hilt_.

hilð pres. 3 sg. of helan.

him ds. of hē, dp. of hē, hēo, hit. [‘_him_’]

himming (Cp 1557) = hemming

hīna v. hīwan.

hinan = heonan  [[under “heona”]]

hīnan = hīenan

-hinca v. helle-h.

hind (y) f. _‘hind,’ (female deer)_, _Æ, Chr, WW_.

hindan _from behind, behind, in the rear_, Æ, AO. æt h. _behind_, Æ.
[_Ger._ hinten]

hindanweard ‡ adv. _hindwards, at the end_.

hindberge f. _raspberry_, _Cp, Ep, Lcd_. [‘_hindberry_’]

hindbrēr m. _raspberry bush_, #Lcd# 146b (hinde-).

hindcealf mn. _fawn_, _WW_. [‘_hindcalf_’]

hindema † superl. adj. _hindmost, last_.

hinder adj. _after (thought)_, _sad (thought)_, MF (Vesp. D xiv): adv.
_behind, back, after, in the farthest part, down_. on h. _backwards_, Æ.
[_Ger._ hinter]

hindergēap _wily, cunning, deceitful_, _WW_. [‘_hinderyeap_’]

hindergenga m. _one who walks backwards_, OEG 26^23: _apostate_, OEG
5^16.

hinderhōc m. _trick_, #Mod# 34.

hinderling I. m. _mean wretch, sneak_, LL 665´. II. adv. in phr. ‘on
hinderling’ _backwards_, _PPs_. [‘_hinderling_’]

hindernes f. _wickedness, guile_, NC 301; MF 166.

hinderscipe m. _wickedness_, DHy, OEG.

hinderðēostru np. _nether darkness_, #PPs# 85^12.

hinderweard _backward, slow_.

hindeweard _reversed, wrong end first, from behind_, CP.

hindfalod n. _hind-fold_, KC 6·112^31.

hind-hæleðe, -heoloð(e) f. _‘ambrosia,’ water agrimony_, _WW_.
[v. ‘_hindheal_’]

±hindrian _to ‘hinder,’ check, repress_, _Chr, LL_.

hindsīð (#Bl#) = hinsīð

hine I. as. of hē. II. = heonan  [[under “heona”]]

hīne = hīwene  [[form of “hīwen”?]]

hinfūs † _ready to depart or die_.

hingang † m. _departure, death_.

hingrian (_Bl_; Æ) = hyngrian  [[under “hyngran”]]

hinn- = hin-

hinon = heonan  [[under “heona”]]

hinsīð † m. _departure, death_. [heonan]  [[under “heona”]]

hinsīðgryre m. _fear of death_, #Sat# 456.

hīo v. hē.

hio- = heo-

hionne? f. ‘_dura mater_,’ LL 5[36].

hior = heorr

hīored = hīred

hīowesclīce = hīwisclīce  [[form of “hīwisc”]]

hip- = hyp-

hipsful (OEG 11^180) = hyspful

hīr = hȳr

hir- = hier-

hīr- = hēor-, hīer-

hira gp. of hē, hēo, hit.

hire gds. of hēo. [‘_her_’]

hīred (ēo, īe, ȳ) m. _household, family, retinue_, _AO, Bo, Mt, WW_:
_brotherhood, company_, _Æ, Ct_. [‘_hird_’]

hīredcniht m. _member of a household_, _Æ_.

hīredcūð _domestic, familiar_, #Sc# 203^13.

hīredgerēfa m. ‘_ex-consul_,’ WW 110^6.

hīredlic _pertaining to a household or court, domestic, familiar_.

hīredman m. _retainer, follower_, _Æ, Ma_. [‘_hirdman_’]

hīredprēost m. _chaplain_, EC 255.

hīredwīfman m. _female member of a household_, TC 531^6.

hīredwist f. _familiarity_, #Sc# 203^12.

his gs. of hē. [‘_his_’]

hīs (BH) = īs

hīsc- = hȳsc-

hispan = hyspan

hisse = hyse

hit v. hē. [‘_it_’]

hittan (y) _to fall in with, meet with_, _‘hit’ upon_, _Chr_ 1066.
[_ON._ hitta]

hīð- = hyð-

hiðer = hider

hiu (_NG_) = hēo

hīw (ēo, īe, ȳ) n. _appearance, form, species, kind_, _Æ, Bl, WW_:
_apparition_, _WW_ 236^8: _‘hue,’ colour_, _A, Bl_: _beauty_: _figure of
speech_.

hīwan mp. (gen. hīwna, hī(g)na) _members of a family, household or
religious house_, _Chr, G_; Æ. [‘_hind_,’ ‘_hewe_’]

hīwbeorht † _radiant, beautiful_.

hīwcund (hīl-) _familiar, domestic_.

hīwcūð (īe) _familiar, well-known_, Æ, CP.

hīwcūðlic _domestic_: _familiar_, GD 32. adv. -līce _familiarly_.

+hīwcūðlician _to make known or familiar to_, NC 294.

hīwcūðnes f. _familiarity_, GD 71^24; 140^7.

hīwcūðrǣdnes f. _familiarity_, WW 191^24.

hīwen n. _household_, _Æ_. [‘_hewen_’]

hīwere m. _dissembler, hypocrite_, Æ.

hīwfæger _comely of form_, MFH 167.

hīwfæst _comely, fair_, OEG.

hīwgedāl n. _divorce_, G.

±hīwian I. _to form, fashion_, _WW_: _colour_: _dissimulate, feign,
pretend_, _Æ_: _figure, signify_, Æ: (+) _transform, transfigure_.
[‘_hue_,’ ‘_hued_’] II. _to marry_, CP 318^1.

hīwiend, hīwigend ‘_informator_,’ OEG 365? ‘_meditator_,’ GPH 390.

hīwisc n. _household_, Æ: _hide_ (_of land_ v. hīd). adv. -līce
_familiarly_.

+hīwlǣcan _to form, shape, fashion_, NC 294.

hīwlēas _shapeless_, _WW_: _colourless_, _Lcd_. [‘_hueless_’]

hīwlic _comely_, #Lcd#, OEG.

hīwna v. hīwan.

hīwrǣden f. _family, household, religious house_, Æ.

hīwscipe m. _family, household_: _hide (of land)_, CC 127.

hīwð pres. 3 sg. of hēawan.

hīwung I. (ēo, ȳ) f. (±) _appearance, likeness, form, figure_:
_pretence, hypocrisy_, Æ. II. f. _marriage_, AO 64^24.

hlacerian _to deride, mock_, #LPs# 24^3.

hlacerung f. _unseemly behaviour, or words_, #LPs# 43^14.

±hladan^6 (æ, ea) _to ‘lade,’ draw, or take in water_, _Æ, JnR_: _heap
up, lay on, build, load, burden_, _B, Gen, Rd_; CP.

hladung f. _drawing (‘haustus’)_, DHy 58^6.

hlǣ = hlǣw

hlæd n. _heap_? _burden_? _CP_ 21^160. [‘_lade_’]

hlædder (_Bl_), hlæddre = hlǣder

hlæddisc m. _loaded dish_? WW 126^39.

hlædel m. ‘_ladle_,’ _A, ZDA_.

hlæden I. m. _bucket_, WW 123^5. II. pp. of hladan.

hlǣder f. ‘_ladder_,’ _A, Æ_; CP.

hlǣderwyrt f. _ladder-wort, Jacob’s ladder_, #Lcd#.

hlædhweogl n. _water-wheel, wheel for drawing up water_, WW 347^7.

hlædst = hlætst pres. 2 sg. of hladan.

hlædtrendel m. _wheel for drawing water_, OEG 502.

hlǣfdige (ā, ē) f. _mistress (over servants)_, _LL, VPs_ (ā), _WW_:
_chatelaine_, _‘lady,’ queen_, _Chr, Ct_: _the Virgin Mary_, _Cr_. sēo
ealde h. _the queen dowager_, #Chr# 1051#c#.

hlæfl = læfel

+hlǣg n. _derision, scorn_, #Dom# 15.

hlægulian (Cp 317) = hlagolian

hlæhan (N, #VPs#) = hliehhan

hlæhter = hleahtor

hlǣnan I. _to cause to lean_, #Jul# 63. II. = lǣnan

-hlǣnan v. ā-hl.

hlǣne ‘_lean_,’ _Æ_; AO.

±hlǣnian _to become lean_, _CP_: _make lean, starve_, _CP_. [‘_lean_’]

hlǣnnes f. ‘_leanness_,’ _Æ, OEG_.

±hlǣnsian _to make lean, weaken_, OEG. [‘_lense_’]

hlǣpewince (WW) = lēapewince  [[headword spelled “hlēapewince”]]

hlæst n. _burden, load, freight_, _B, Rd_. holmes h. _finny tribe_.
[‘_last_’]

+hlæstan (e) _to load, burden_, _BH_: _adorn_, #Jud# 36.
[v. ‘_last_’ vb.]

hlæsting f. _toll on loading a ship_, TC 359.

hlæstscip n. _trading-vessel_, Cp 147#h#.

hlæt = læt

hlætst pres. 2 sg. of hladan.

hlǣw † (ā) mn. _mound, cairn, hill, mountain_, _B_: _grave-yard,
barrow_, _Met_: _hollow mound, cave_. [‘_low_’]

hlāf m. _‘loaf,’ bread, food_, _A, JnL, MtL_; Æ, AO, CP.

hlāfǣta m. _(‘loaf-eater’), dependant_, _LL_.

hlāfbrytta m. _slave in charge of the bread-store_? EC 255.

hlāfdie (#VPs#) = hlǣfdige

hlāfgang m. _attendance at, or participation in, a meal_, RB:
_procession with the host_, LL.

hlāf-gebrece ‡, -gebroc n. _bit of bread_.

hlāfhwǣte m. _bread-wheat_, TC 144^34.

hlāflēast f. _want of bread_.

hlāfmæsse f. _‘Lammas’ (August 1)_, _AO_; Æ.

hlāfmæssedæg m. _Lammas-day_.

hlāfofn m. _baker’s oven_, WW 411^8.

hlāford m. _‘lord,’ master, ruler_, _A, AO, B, Chr, G_; Æ, CP:
_husband_, _Ct_: _the Lord, God_, _Æ_. [hlāf, weard]

hlāforddōm m. _lordship, authority_, _CP_: _patronage_. [‘_lorddom_’]

hlāfordhyldo f. _loyalty_, AO.

hlāfording m. _lord, master_, W 298^7.

hlāfordlēas _without a lord, leaderless_, _B_. [‘_lordless_’]

hlāfordlic _‘lordly,’ noble_, _OEG_ 187^1.

hlāfordscipe m. _‘lordship,’ authority, rule_, _CP_: _‘dominatio’ (title
of an order of angels)_, _ÆH_ 1·342^32.

hlāfordsearu fn. _high treason_, LL.

hlāfordsōcn f. _act of seeking the protection of a lord_, LL.

hlāfordswica m. _traitor_, _Lcd_; Æ. [‘_lordswike_’]

hlāfordswice m. _high treason, treachery_.

hlāford-swīcung (MFN 167; W 225^28), -syrwung (LL 16n5) f. _betrayal of
one’s lord, treason_.

hlāfordðrimm m. _dominion, power_, NC 302.

hlāfræce f. _oven-rake_, OEG 53^43 (hlāb-).

hlāfsēnung f. _blessing of bread (on Lammas-day)_, MH 136^1.

hlāfurd = hlāford

hlagol _inclined to laugh_, W 40^8.

hlagolian (æ) _to sound_.

hlāmmæsse = hlāfmæsse

hlanc _‘lank,’ lean, thin_, _Jud, PPs_.

hland (o) n. _urine_, _Lcd_. [‘_lant_’]

hlaðian = laðian

hlāw = hlǣw

hleadan = hladan

hleahter = hleahtor

hleahterful _scornful_, #Guth#.

hleahterlic _ridiculous_, #Guth#.

hleahtor (e) m. _‘laughter,’ jubilation_, _B, Bl, CP, Sc_: _derision_.

hleahtorsmið m. _laughter-maker_, #Ex# 43.

hleahtrian (e) _to deride_, #LPs# 21^8.

hlēapan^7 _to ‘leap,’ run, go, jump, dance, spring_, _Æ, B, BH, Chr,
CP_: (+) _leap upon, mount (a horse)_.

hlēapere m. _runner, courier_, _Chr_: _‘leaper,’ dancer_, _WW_:
_itinerant monk_, RB 135^20.

hlēapestre f. _female dancer_, WW 311^33.

hlēapettan v. _to leap up_, BH 390^9.

hlēapewince f. ‘_lapwing_,’ _WW_.

hlēapung f. _dancing_, _Æ_. [‘_leaping_’]

hlēat pret. 3 sg. of hlēotan.

hlec _leaky_, _CP, OEG_. [v. ‘_leak_’]

hlecan^5 _to cohere_, CP 361^20.

hleda, hlede m. _seat_, #ÆGr# 34^3.

hlēf = hlǣw

-hlēfan (oe) v. ā-hl.

hlēga (_LkL_ 6^16) = lǣwa

hlehhan = hliehhan

hleht- = hleaht-

hlem m. _sound_, CP.

hlemman _to cause to sound, clash_, #Whale# 61. [hlimman]

hlēnan = lǣnan

hlence f. _coat of mail_, #Ex# 218.

hlennan = hlynnan

hlenortēar m. _hyssop_, #LPs# 50^8.

hlēo † m? n? (hlēow), gs. hlēowes (only found in sg.) _covering, refuge,
defence, shelter, protection_, _Cr, PPs_: _protector, lord_. [‘_lee_’]

hlēo- = hlēow-

hlēobord n. _book-cover_, #Rd# 27^12.

hlēoburh † f. _protecting city_.

hlēod = hlōd

+hleodu pl. of +hlid.

hlēofæst _consoling, protecting_, #Cr#, RB.

hlēohræscnes f. ‘_supplantatio_’? #LPs# 40^10.

hlēolēas † _without shelter, comfortless_.

hleomoc m? hleomoce f. _speedwell_, _Lcd_. [v. ‘_brooklime_’]

hlēon = hlēowan

hleon- = hlin-

hlēonað m. _shelter_, #Gu# 222.

hlēonian _to thrive_, #Ph# 25.

hlēop pret. 3 sg. of hlēapan.

hlēor n. _cheek_, _Lcd, WW_: _face, countenance_, _Ep, Gu_. [‘_leer_’]

hlēoran (ÆL) = lēoran

hlēorbān n. _(cheek-bone), temple_, #LPs# 131^5.

hlēorbolster m. _pillow_, B 688.

hlēordropa m. _tear_, #Gu# 1315.

hlēorsceamu f. _confusion of face_, #PPs# 68^8.

hlēorslæge m. _a blow on the cheek_, CP 261^6.

hlēortorht _beautiful_, #Rd# 69^6.

hlēosceorp n. _sheltering robe_, #Rd# 10^5.

hlēotan^1 _to cast lots_, Æ, AO: (±) _get by lot, obtain_.

hlēoð = (1) hlēowð; (2) pres. pl. of hlēowan.

hlēoðor n. _noise, sound, voice, melody, song_: _hearing_.

+hlēoðor _harmonious_, BH 60^18.

hlēoðorcwide † m. _speaking, words, discourse, song, prophecy_.

hlēoðorcyme m. _coming with trumpet-sound_, #Da# 710.

hlēoðorstede ‡ m. _place of conference_.

hlēoðrian _to sound, speak, sing, cry aloud, resound, proclaim_, Æ.

hlēoðrung f. _reproof_, #SPs# 37^11.

hleoðu v. hlið.

hlēow == hlēo

+hlēow I. _warm, sunny_, _Nar_. adv. hlēowe _Lcd_. [v. ‘_lew_’] II. =
+hlōw

±hlēowan (ī, ȳ) (±) _to warm, make warm, cherish_, _Bl_: _become warm or
hot_. [‘_lew_’]

hlēowdryhten m. _protector, patron_, #Wid# 94.

hlēowfeðre fp. _sheltering wings_, #Gen# 2740.

hlēowlora m. _one who has lost a protector_, #Gen# 1953.

hlēowmǣg † m. _kinsman who is bound to afford protection_.

hlēowon pret. pl. of hlōwan.

hlēowstede m. _sunny place_, WW 336^50.

hlēowstōl m. _shelter, asylum_, #Gen# 2011.

hlēowð (ī, ȳ) f. _shelter, covering, warmth_, _Æ_. [‘_lewth_’]

±hlēowung (ī) f. _shelter, protection, favour_.

hlestan = hlæstan, hlystan

hlet (#KGl#) pres. 3 sg. of hladan.

hlēt (#VPs#; MkR) = hlīet

+hlēða † m. _companion, denizen_. [hlōð]

hlēðrian = hlēoðrian

hlēw = hlǣw

hlēwesa = lēwsa

hlēwð pres. 3 sg. of hlōwan.

hlid I. n. _‘lid,’ covering, door, gate, opening_, _Æ_. II. = hlið

+hlid n. (nap. hlidu, hleodu) _covering, vault, roof_.

hlīdan^1 _to come forth, spring up_, #PPs# 79^11?

hlidfæst _closed by a lid_, Æ.

hlidgeat n. _swing-gate, folding-door_, _EC_; Æ; Mdf. [‘_lidgate_’]

+hlidod (eo) _provided with a lid_, _BH_ 320^10. [‘_lidded_’]

hliehhan^6 (e, i, y) _to laugh_, _Æ, CP_: (±) _laugh at, deride_, _Æ,
MtL_: _rejoice_. [‘_laugh_’]

hlīep (ȳ) mf., hlīepe f. _‘leap,’ bound, spring, sudden movement_, _Cr,
Lcd_: _thing to leap from_, AO: (?) v. CC 54.

-hlīepe v. stæð-hl.  [[headword spelled “stæðhlȳpe”]]

-hlīeplīce v. stæð-hl.  [[headword spelled “stæðhlȳplīce”]]

hlīepen pres. pl. of hlēapan.

hlīepgeat (ȳ) n. _a low gate_, _KC_. [‘_leapgate_’]

hlīet (ē) m. _lot, chance, fortune_, CP.

hlīfend (hlīb-) _threatening_, Cp 223#m#.

hlīfian _to rise high, tower, overhang_.

hlīgan^{1?} _to attribute (to)_, CP, #Da#.

hligsa (CP) = hlīsa

hlihan, hlihcan, hlihhan = hliehhan

hlimman^3 (y) _to sound, resound, roar, rage_.

hlimme † f. _stream, torrent_.

hlin I. m. _maple-tree_, #Rd# 56^9. [_Ger._ lehne] II. = hlynn

hlinbedd n. _sick-bed, couch_, B 3034.

hlinc m. _ridge, bank, rising ground, hill_, _EC, Ph_; Mdf. [‘_link_’]

hlincrǣw f. _bank of turf_, EC 370.

hlinduru † f. _latticed door_.

±hlinian (eo, y) _to ‘lean,’_ _B_ (eo); Æ: _recline, lie down, rest_,
_Jn, MkL_; CP.

hlinræced † n. _prison_.

hlin-scūa †, -scuwa † m. _darkness of confinement_.

hlinsian = hlynsian

hlinung f. ‘_leaning_,’ _Lk_: _seat, couch_.

hlīosa = hlīsa

hlīpð pres. 3 sg. of hlēapan.

hlīra = līra

hlīsa (īo, ȳ) m. _sound_: _fame, rumour, renown, glory_, CP.

hlīsbǣre _renowned_, OEG.

hlīsēadig _renowned, famed_, #Bo#.

hlīsēadignes f. _renown_, #Bo# 75^28.

hlīsful _of good repute, famous_, Æ. adv. -līce, Æ, AO.

hlīsig _renowned_, OEG 8^250.

hlistan = hlystan

hlið I. † n. (nap. hleoðu) _cliff, precipice, slope, hill-side, hill_,
_An, B_; Mdf. [‘_lith_’] II. == hlid

hlīw == hlēow

hloccetung f. _sighing_.

hlōd pret. 3 sg. of haldan.

hlodd = hlot

hlōgon pret. pl., hlōh pret. 3 sg. of hliehhan.

hlom (WW 117^25), hlond = hland

hlōse f. _pigsty_, LL 454[10]; NC 302; Mdf.

hlosnere m. _listener_, OEG 2333.

hlosnian _to listen_: _wait_, Æ: _be on the look out for, spy_, Æ.
hlosniend ‘_attonitus_.’

hlot, hlott n. _‘lot,’ part, portion, share_, _Æ, BC, Bl, G_: (+)
_choice, decision_, Æ, AO.

hloten pp. of hleotan.  [[headword spelled “hlēotan”]]

+hlotland n. _allotted land, inheritance_, Æ.

hlōð f. _troop, crowd, band, company_, AO: _booty, spoil_: _complicity
with a band of robbers_.

hlōðbōt f. _penalty imposed on a member of a gang of malefactors_, LL.

hlōðere m. _robber_. [hlōð]

hlōðgecrod n. _mass of troops_, #Rd# 4^63.

hlōðian _to spoil, plunder_, BH.

hlōðsliht m. _murder by a member of a gang of malefactors_, LL 18[29].

+hlōw n. _lowing, bellowing_, Æ.

hlōwan^7 _to low, roar, bellow_, Æ.

hlōwung f. _lowing, bleating, bellowing_, WW 192^7; 195^13.

hlūd adj. comp. hlūdre, hluddre _‘loud,’ sonorous_, _CP_; Æ.

hlūdclipol _loud, noisy_, RBL 35^11 (hlūt-).

hluddre v. hlūd.

hlūde adv. _loudly, aloud_, _Bl_; Æ, CP. [‘_loud_’]

hlūdnes f. _clamour, noise_, _A_ 8·332. [‘_loudness_’]

hlūdstefne _loud sounding_, WW 416^18.

hlūdswēge adv. _loudly_, Æ.

hlummon pret. pl. of hlimman.

hlupon pret. pl. of hlēapan.

hluton pret. pl. of hlēotan.

hlūtor, hlūttor (e^2) gsm. hlūtres _pure, clear, bright, sincere_, Æ,
CP. [_Ger._ lauter] adv. -līce.

hlūtorlicnes = hlūtornes

hlūtornes f. _clearness, brightness, simplicity, purity_, Æ.

hlūtre I. adv. _clearly, brightly_. II. ds. of hlūtor.

hlūtter, hlūttor = hlūtor

±hlūttrian wv. _to clear, purify, make bright_: _to become clear_.

hlyd = hlid

±hlȳd f. _noise, sound_: (+) _tumult, disturbance, dissension_. [hlūd]

Hlȳda m. _March_, _Lcd_. [‘_Lide_’; hlūd]

hlȳdan _to make a noise, sound, clamour, vociferate_, Æ, CP. [hlūd]

hlȳde f. _torrent_, BC (Mdf).

hlȳdig _garrulous_, OEG 1418. [hlūd]

hlȳding f. _noise, cry_, MtL 25^6 (lȳ-).

hlyhhan = hliehhan

hlymman = hlimman

hlyn = hlynn

hlynian = (1) hlynnan; (2) hlinian

±hlynn I. m. _sound, noise, din, tumult_, AO. II. f. _torrent_, _JnL_.
[‘_linn_’]

hlynnan _to make a noise, resound, shout, roar_.

hlynrian _to thunder_, WW 519^34.

hlynsian † (i) _to resound_.

hlȳp == hlīep

hlȳsa (Æ) = hlīsa

hlȳsfullīce = hlīsfullīce  [[form of “hlīsful”]]

hlysnan _to ‘listen,’_ _MtL_; Cp.

hlysnere m. _hearer_, DR 29^4 (ly-).

±hlyst f. _sense of hearing_, _Æ, Lcd_: _listening_. [‘_list_’]

±hlystan (e, i) _to listen, hear_, _CP_; Æ: _attend to, obey_, _Lk_.
[‘_list_’]

+hlyste _audible_, NC 294.

hlystend, hlystere m. _listener_, Æ.

+hlystful _attentive, gracious_, #LPs# 89^13.

hlystung f. _act of listening_, #Kl#.

hlȳt, hlȳte m. _lot, portion_, Æ: _band, troop_.

hlyta = hlytta

+hlyta m. _companion_. [hlot]

hlȳtere m. _clergyman, priest_, NC 302.

hlytm m. _casting of lots_, B 3126?

hlytman _to decide by lot_, MFH 167.

hlytta m. _diviner, soothsayer_, AO 184^26. [hlot]

+hlytto _fellowship_, DR.

hlyttor (#HGl# 418) = hluttor, hlūtor

hlȳttrian _to purify_, #ÆGr# 222^7.

hlȳttrung f. _cleaning, refining_, WW 179^36.

-hlȳðan (= īe) v. be-hl.

hlȳðre = lȳðre

hlȳw- = hlēow-

hlȳwing = hlēowung

hnacod = nacod

hnǣcan = nǣcan

±hnǣgan I. _to bow down, bend, humble, curb, vanquish_. [hnīgan] II. _to
‘neigh,’_ _ÆGr_. III. = nǣgan

hnǣgung f. ‘_neighing_,’ _ÆGr, Cp_.

hnæpp m. _bowl_, _OEG, WW_. [‘_nap_’; _Ger._ napf]

hnæpp- = hnapp-

hnæppan _to strike_, #Bo# 130^19,20.

hnæsce = hnesce

+hnǣst, +hnāst n. _collision, conflict, battle_. [hnītan]

hnāg, hnāh I. _bent down, abject, poor, humble, lowly_: _niggardly_. II.
pret. 3 sg. of hnīgan.

hnappian (æ, e, ea) _to doze, slumber, sleep_, _CP, Mt_; Æ. [‘_nap_’]

hnappung (æ, ea) f. _napping, dozing, slumbering_, CP.

hnāt pret. 3 sg. of hnītan.

hneap- (#VPs#) = hnap-

hnēaw _mean, niggardly, stingy, miserly_, CP. [_Ger._ genau] adv. -līce.

hnēawnes f. _meanness_, CP.

hnecca m. ‘_neck_,’ _Æ, CP_.

hnēgan = (1) nǣgan; (2) hnǣgan

hneofule f. = hnifol

-hnēopan v. ā-h. [cp. _Goth._ dishniupan]

hneoton pret. pl. of hnītan.

hnep (GD 186^27) = hnæpp

hneppian (#KGl#) = hnappian

hnesce (æ, i, y) _soft, tender, mild_, _CP_: _weak, delicate_, _Æ_:
_slack, negligent_, _CP_: _effeminate, wanton_, _Æ_. [‘_nesh_’]

±hnescian _to make soft, soften_, _Æ, CPs_: _become soft, give way,
waver_, _CP, Lcd_; ÆL. [‘_nesh_’]

hnesclic _soft, luxurious, effeminate_, AO. adv. -līce _softly, gently,
tenderly_, _CP_. [‘_neshly_’]

hnescnes f. _softness, weakness, effeminacy_, _CP, Lcd, MtL_; Æ: _soft
part of anything_. [‘_neshness_’]

hnett (_MtL_ 4^18) = nett

hnexian (Æ) = hnescian

hnifol m. _brow, forehead_.

hnifol-crumb, -crump _inclined, leaning over, prone_, WW.

hnīgan^1 _to bow oneself, bend, bow down_: _fall, decline, sink_.
[_Ger._ neigen]

hnigian _to bend down (the head)_, #Lcd# 7a.

hniglan = hnygelan

hnipend _bending, lowly_, #HGl# 436.

hnipian _to bow down_, _Met, OEG_; Æ: _bow the head, look gloomy_, _CP_.
[‘_nipe_’]

hnippan? _to sink down_, OEG 1579n.

hnisce (MkR 13^28) = hnesce

hnītan^1 _to thrust, butt, knock, come into collision with, encounter_.

hnitol _thrusting forwards, addicted to butting (of an ox)_.

hnitu f. _louse-egg, ‘nit,’_ _Ep, Lcd_; Æ.

hnoll m. _top, crown of the head_, _Æ, VPs_. [‘_noll_’]

hnossian _to strike_, #Rd# 6^7.

hnot _bare, bald, ‘close-cropped,’_ _ÆGr_. [‘_not_’]

hnutbēam m. _nut tree_.

hnutcyrnel mn. _kernel of a nut_, #Lcd#.

hnutu f. gs. and nap. hnyte ‘_nut_,’ _Erf, Lcd, MtR_; Mdf.

+hnycned _wrinkled_? #Lcd# 97a.

hnydele = hydele

hnygelan (i) pl. _clippings_, WW.

hnȳlung f. _reclining_, WW 153^24.

+hnyscan _to crush_, MtR 21^44. [hnesce]

hnysce = hnesce

+hnyst _contrite_, †#PsC# 127.

hnyte gs. and nap. of hnutu.

hō = hōh

hōbanca m. _couch_, WW 280^12. [hōh]

hōc m. ‘_hook_,’ _BH, WW_: _angle_, _Mt, Nar_.

hocc m. _mallow_, _Cp, Lcd_. [‘_hock_’]

hōcede _curved_, _KC_. [‘_hooked_’]

hōcer = hōcor

-hōciht v. heoru-h.

hōcīsern n. _small sickle_, WW 235^1.

hoclēaf n. _mallow_, #Lcd#.

hōcor n. _insult, derision_, W 164^17.

hōcorwyrde _derisive, scornful_, W 164^13.

hōd m. ‘_hood_,’ _Ep, WW_.

hof n. _enclosure, court, dwelling, building, house, hall_: _temple,
sanctuary_. [_Ger._ hof]

hōf I. m. ‘_hoof_,’ _Run, WW_; Æ. II. pret. 3 sg. of hebban.

hofding m. _chief, leader_. [_ON._ höfðingi]

hōfe f. _‘hove,’ alehoof (plant)_, _Lcd, WW_.

hofer m. _hump_, #Gl#: _swelling_.

hoferede _humpbacked_, _CP, Lcd, WW_. [‘_hovered_’]

hoferiend, +hoferod (ÆL) = hoferede

-hōfian v. be-h.

hōflic _pertaining to a court_, OEG 2996.

+hōfod _hoofed_, ÆL 25^44.

hōfon pret. pl. of hebban.

hofor == hofer

hōf-rec, -ræc n. _hoof-track, bridle-track_, #Lcd#.

hofrede _confined to the house, bedridden_, WW 162^8.

hōfring m. _print of a horse’s hoof_ (= hōfhring) OEG 18.

hofweard m. _ædile_, WW 111^20.

hog- = hoh-

hoga I. _careful, prudent_, _DR, MtL_. [‘_howe_’] II. m. _fear, care_:
_attempt, struggle_, OEG 8^283.

hoga- = hog-, hoh-

hogade = hogode

hogde pret. of hycgan or hogian.

hogelēas _free from care_, NC 303.

hogg _hog_, NC 302.

±hogian _to care for, think about, reflect, busy oneself with_, Æ:
_intend, strive, wish for_. [hyge]

hogode pret. of hogian.

hogu f. _care_, Æ.

hogung f. _endeavour_, DHy 8^12.

hōh m., gs. hōs, nap. hōas, hōs, dp. hōum _hough, heel_, _Æ, Jn, Ps_.
on h. _behind_: _point of land_, _Ct, Nar_; Mdf. [‘_ho_,’ ‘_hoe_’]

hoh-fæst, hog(a)- (NG) _prudent, cautious, wise_.

hōhfōt m. _heel_, #LPs# 55^7.

hohful (hoga-, N) _careful, thoughtful_, Æ: _full of care, anxious,
pensive, sad_, _Ct, Sc_. [‘_howful_’]

hohfulnes f. _care, trouble_, KC 3·349^11.

hōh-hwyrfing, -hwerfing f. _heel-turning, circle_? v. OEG 18n.

hohlīce (hog-) _prudently_, LkL 16^8.

hohmōd _sad, sorrowful_, W 72^8.

hōhscanca m. _leg, shank_, #Lcd# 14a.

hohscipe (hoga-) m. _prudence_, N.

hōhsinu f. _sinew of the heel_, _Æ, Lcd_. [‘_hough-sinew_’]

-hōhsnian v. on-h.

hōhspor n. _heel_, WW 160^26.

hol I. _hollow_, #Lcd#: _depressed, lying in a hollow_, _CP, Ct, MH_.
[‘_holl_’] II. n. _hollow place, cave, hole, den_, _Ct, Lk, Met, WW_;
AO, Æ: _perforation, aperture_, _Cp_. [‘_hole_,’ ‘_holl_’]

hōl n. _calumny, slander_, Æ.

-hola v. oter-h.

+hola m. _protector, defender_, Æ. [helan]

holc n? holca? m. _hole, cavity_, _Lcd_. [‘_holk_’]

hold I. _gracious, friendly, kind, favourable_, _AO, B_; Æ: _true,
faithful, loyal_, _Æ, LL_; CP: _acceptable, pleasant_. [‘_hold_’; _ON._
hollr] adv. holde _graciously, loyally_, _Ps_. [‘_holde_’] II. n. _dead
body, carcase_, _Mt_; Æ. [‘_hold_’; _ON._ hold] III. m. _holder of
allodial land, ranking below a_ jarl (_Danish word_), LL: _military
chief_, MkR 6^21. [_ON._ holdr]

holdāð m. _oath of allegiance_, #Chr#.

holdelīce = holdlīce

holdhlāford m. _gracious lord, liege lord_, #Chr# 1014#e#.

holdian _to cut up, disembowel_, ÆL 23^73. [hold II.]

holdlic _faithful, friendly_, OEG 50^29. adv. -līce _graciously_, _Æ,
WW_: _faithfully, loyally_. [‘_holdely_’]

holdrǣden f. _fidelity, faithful service_, ÆH 2·150^30.

holdscipe m. _loyalty, allegiance_, #Chr#.

holecerse _a plant_, #Lcd#.

holegn = holen I.

holen I. m. ‘_holly_,’ _Cp, WW_; Æ; Mdf. adj. _of holly_, _Lcd_. II. pp.
of helan.

hōlenga = hōlinga

holenlēaf n. _holly leaf_, #Lcd# 127a.

holenrind f. _holly bark_, #Lcd# 29b.

holenstybb m. _holly-stump_.

holh (_CP_), holg n. gs. hōles _hole, ‘hollow.’_

holian _to hollow out, scoop out_, _Æ_: _to become hollow, be
perforated_, Æ. [‘_hole_’]

hōlian _to oppress_, _Ps_. [‘_hole_’]

+holian _to obtain_, CP 209^19.

holing f. _hollow place_, GD 113^11.

hōlinga adv. _in vain, without reason_.

holl = hol II.

hollēac n. _onion_? _WW_ 270^29. [‘_holleke_’]

holm m. †_wave, sea, ocean, water_, _B_: in prose, esp. in place-names
_island (esp. in a river or creek)_, _Chr_. [‘_holm_’]

holmærn n. _ship_, #Gen# 1422.

holmclif † n. _sea-cliff, rocky shore_.

holmeg adj. _of the sea_, #Ex# 118.

holmmægen n. _force of the waves_, #Rd# 3^9.

holm-ðracu † f., gs. -ðræce _restless sea_.

holmweall m. _wall of sea water_, #Ex# 467.

holmweard (#An# 359) = helmweard

holmweg m. _sea-path_, #An# 382.

holmwylm m. _billows_, B 2411.

holnes f. _hollow place_, GD 99^22 (o).

hōlonga = hōlinga

holpen pp. of helpan.

holrian = heolorian

holstæf m. _‘apex,’ tittle_, MtR 5^18.

holt nm. _forest, wood, grove, thicket_, _Æ, B_; CP; Mdf: _wood,
timber_, _Jul_. [‘_holt_’]

holt-hana, -ana m. _woodcock_, WW 344^30.

hōltihte f. _calumny_, WW.

holtwudu † m. _forest, grove_, _Ph_: _wood (timber)_. [v. ‘_holt_’]

hōlunga = hōlinga

hom == ham

hōm == ōm

hōman = ōman

hōn I. (sv^7) pret. heng, pp. hangen _to hang, suspend, crucify_, Æ:
_adorn_. II. pl. _tendrils of a vine_? A 4·143.

hon- = han-

hona = (1) heonu; (2) hana

hōnede _having heels_, WW 161^26. [hōh]

+honge = +hange

hop n. _privet_, v. OEG 36^14.

hōp m. _hoop_? v. NC 303.

-hop v. fen-, mōr-h.

hopa m. ‘_hope_,’ _Æ_. [usu. tōhopa]

hōpgehnāst † n. _dashing of waves_.

hopian _to ‘hope,’ expect, look for_, _A, Æ_; CP: _put trust in_, _Æ,
Bo, Bl_.

hōpig _eddying, surging_, #PPs# 68^5.

+hopp n. _small bag_, WW 405^3.

hoppāda m. _upper garment, cope_, WW 188^14.

hoppe f. _a kind of ornament_, AO: _dog-collar_, LL 194[8].

hoppestre f. _female dancer_, _Æ_. [‘_hoppestere_’]

hoppetan _to leap for joy_: _to throb_.

hoppian _to hop, jump, leap, dance_, Æ: _limp_, ÆL 21^417. [_Ger._
hüpfen]

hopscȳte f. _sheet, counterpane_, Æ (9^307).

hōr n. _adultery_.

hora- = horu-

horas v. horh.

hōrcwene f. _whore, adulteress_, LL.

hord nm. _‘hoard,’ treasure_, _B, Chr, Gen, MtR, WW_.

hordærn = hordern

hordburg f. _treasure-city_, B, BC, #Gen#.

hord-cleofa, -clyfa m. _treasure-chest, treasury, secret chamber_, Æ.

hordcofa m. _treasure-chamber, closet_: (†) _breast, heart, thoughts_.

hordere m. _treasurer, chamberlain, steward_, _Æ, KC_. [‘_hoarder_’]

hordern n. _treasury, storehouse_, Æ.

horderwȳce f. _office of treasurer_, #Chr# 1137.

hordfæt n. _treasure-receptacle_, Æ.

hord-geat n., gs. -gates _door to a treasure-chamber_, #Rd# 43^11.

hordgestrēon † n. _hoarded treasure_.

hordian _to ‘hoard,’_ _Æ_.

hordloca m. _treasure-chest, coffer_: (†) _secret thoughts, mind_.

hordmægen n. _riches_, #Da# 675.

hordmāðm † m. _hoarded treasure_.

hordweard m. _guardian of treasure_: _king_: _heir, first-born_.

hordwela m. _hoarded wealth_, B 2344.

hordweorðung f. _honouring by gifts from the hoard_, B 952.

hordwitt n. _treasure of wisdom_, #Kl#.

hordwynn f. _delightful treasure_, B 2270.

hordwyrðe _worth hoarding_, B 2245?

hōre f. _whore, prostitute_, OEG.

horeht = horwiht

+horgian _to defile_, #Bk#: _spit_.

horh (horg) mn., gs. hor(w)es, instr. horu, nap. horas _phlegm, mucus_,
_Æ, El, Ep, Lcd_: _dirt, defilement, uncleanness_; Mdf. [‘_hore_’]

horheht = horwiht

horian _to cry out_, #Ps#.

+horian (N) = +horgian

horig _foul, filthy_, _Æ, LL_. [‘_hory_’]

hōring m. _adulterer, fornicator_, W 309^21.

horn m. _horn (musical instrument, drinking-horn, cupping-horn)_,
_beast’s horn_, _Ct, Lcd, LL, VPs_; AO: _projection, pinnacle_, _Ps_.

hornbǣre _horned_, #ÆGr# 27^16.

hornblāwere m. _horn-blower, trumpeter_.

hornboga † m. _bow tipped with horn_?

hornbora m. _horn-bearer, trumpeter_, WW.

hornfisc m. _garfish_, #An# 370.

hornfōted _hoofed_, WW 213^22.

horngēap † _broad between the pinnacles or gables_.

horngestrēon n. _wealth of pinnacles (on a house)_? [or ?=
hordgestrēon], #Ruin# 23.

+hornian _to insult_, MkL 12^4.

hornlēas _without horns_, ES 39·349.

hornpīc m. _pinnacle_, _MtL_. [v. ‘_pike_’]

hornreced n. _hall with gables_, B 704.

hornsæl n. = hornsele

hornscēað f. _pinnacle_, MtL 4^5.

hornscip n. _beaked ship_, #An# 274.

hornsele m. _house with gables_, #Gen# 1821.

hornungsunu m. _bastard_, WW 456^10.

horo- = horu-

horpytt m. _mud-hole_, EC 445^15.

hors n. _horse_, _OET, WW, VPs_; Æ, AO, CP; Mdf.

horsbǣr f. _horse-litter_, _BH_; ÆL. [‘_horse-bier_’]

horsc _sharp, quick, active, ready, daring_: _quick-witted, wise,
prudent_.

horscamb m. _‘horse-comb,’ curry-comb, strigil_, _WW_.

horschwæl (= *horshwæl) m. _walrus_, AO 17^36.

horsclic _sordid, squalid, foul_, OEG 1789. [horh]

horsclīce _briskly, readily, promptly_: _prudently, wisely_.

horscniht m. _master of the horse, equerry, groom, esquire_, Æ (8^242).

horscræt n. _‘biga,’ chariot_, WW 194^26.

horselene f. _elecampane_, _WW_. [‘_horseheal_’]

horsern n. _stable_, WW.

horsgærstūn m. _meadow in which horses are kept_, KC 3·414^25.

horshelene = horselene

horshierde (i^2, y^2) m. _ostler, groom_.

±horsian _to provide with horses_, _Chr_. [‘_horse_’]

horslīce = horsclīce

hors-ðegn, -ðēn m. _ostler, groom, equerry_: _muleteer_, GD 191^23.

horswǣn m. _chariot_, WW 140^4.

horswealh m. _groom, equerry_, LL 22; 132.

horsweard f. _care of horses_, LL 445[2].

horsweg m. _bridle-road_, _KC_. [‘_horseway_’]

hortan sbpl. _‘whortle’-berries_, v. OEG 2^433.

horu = horh

horusēað m. _sink, pit_, #Bo# 112^15.

horuweg (o^2) m. _dirty road_? KC 5·173^17.

horweht = horwiht

horwes v. horh.

horwig = orweg

+horwigian _to defile, spit upon_.

horwiht (e^2) _mucose, defiled, filthy_, #Guth# 36^9.

horwyll m. _muddy stream_, EC 445^19.

horxlic = horsclic

hōs I. f. _escort, company_, B 924. II. f. _bramble, briar_. III.
v. hōh.

hosa m., hose f. ‘_hose_,’ _WW_.

hosebend m. _hose-band, garter_, OEG 4822.

hosp m. _reproach, insult, contumely_, Æ: _blasphemy_, Æ.

hospcwide m. _insulting speech_, #El# 523.

hospettan _to ridicule_, Cp 697#s#.

hospsprǣc f. _jeer, taunt_, ÆH 2·514.

hospul ‘_irritus_,’ #RPs# 88^35.

hospword n. _abusive language, contemptuous expression_, Æ.

hosse = hysse

hōstig (ÆL 35^192) = ōstig

hosu f. _hose_, RB: _pod, husk_, Cp 1867.

hotor = otor

hoðma † m. _darkness, the grave_.

hrā = hrǣw

hraca m. _throat_, _Lcd_? [‘_rake_’]

hrāca (ǣ) m. _clearing of the throat_: _spittle, mucus_.

hrace, hracu f. _throat_, _Æ, VPs_ (æ). [‘_rake_’]

hrad- v. hræd-

hrade = hraðe

±hradian (ea, ð) _to be quick, hasten, do diligently_: _further,
prosper_, ÆL 20^78.

hradung (æ) f. _quickness, despatch, diligence_. on hrædinge
_quickly_, ÆL.

hræ- = hra-, hre-, hrea-

hrǣ = hrǣw

hrǣ- = hrēa-, hrēo-, rǣ-

hrǣca m. _clearing the throat_. [= hrāca]

hrǣcan tr. and intr. _to ‘reach,’ bring up (blood or phlegm)_, _CP,
Lcd_; Æ.

+hræcan = +reccan

hrǣcetung f. _eructation_, #Lcd# 69b.

hrǣcgebræc n. _sore throat_, WW.

hræcing f. _detention_, DR 65^13.

hrǣctan _to eructate_, #Lcd# 84a.

hrǣctunge f. _uvula_, #Lcd# 17a.

hrǣcung f. _clearing of the throat_, _Lcd_. [‘_reaching_’]

hræd (e) (hrad- occly. in obl. cases) _quick, nimble, ready, active,
alert, prompt_, _CP, Gl, Mt_. [‘_rad_’]

hrædbīta m. _blackbeetle_, WW (hræð-).

hrædfērnes f. _swiftness_, #Bo# 72^17.

hrædhȳdig _hasty_.

hrædhȳdignes f. _haste, precipitation_, CP.

hræding f. _haste_, W 22^14.

hrædlic (ð) _quick, sudden, premature_, _B, Bo_; Æ, AO, CP. adv. -līce
_quickly, hastily, soon, speedily, forthwith_, Æ, CP. [‘_radly_,’
‘_rathely_’]

hrædlicnes (e) f. _suddenness_, #Guth#: _earliness_, #EPs# 118^147.

hrædmōd _hasty_, ÆL 16^342.

hrædnes f. (±) _quickness_: _brevity_.

hrædrīpe (ræd-) _ripening early_, WW.

hrædtæfle _quick at throwing dice_? #Cra# 73 (v. ES 43·339).

hrædung = hradung

hrædwǣn m. _swift chariot_.

hrædwilnes f. _haste, precipitation_, CP.

hrædwyrde _hasty of speech_, #Wa# 66.

hræfn I. hræfen (e) m. _raven_, _Æ, B, G, VPs_: _sign of the raven (the
Danish banner)_. II. = hæfern

hræfncynn (e) n. _raven-species_, Æ.

hræfnesfōt m. _ravensfoot, cinquefoil_, OET p8.

-hrǣgan v. ofer-hr.

hrægel = hrægl

hrægelgefrætwodnes f. _fine clothing_, LL (396^27).

hrægelðegn m. _keeper of the robes, ‘vestiarius.’_

hrægl n. (e) _dress, clothing_, _Gl, Jn_; AO, CP: _armour_: _sail_.
[‘_rail_’]

hræglcyst f. _clothes-box, trunk_, Ct.

hræglgewǣde n. _dress_, WW 430^33.

hræglhūs f. _vestry_, RB.

hræglscēara fp. _shears for cutting cloth_, WW 241^40 (rægl-).

hrægltalu f. _vestment-fund_, KC, RB.

hræglung f. _clothing_, WW 151^5.

hræglweard m. _keeper of vestments or robes_, WW 279^19.

hrægnloca = brægnloca

hræmn, hrǣm = hræfn

hræn = hærn

hrǣron pret. pl. of hrēran.

hrǣs v. hrǣw.

hræscetung = ræscetung  [[Cross-reference uncertain.]]

-hræscian v. ā-hr.

hrætelwyrt f. _rattlewort_, WW 301^3.

hræð == hræd. [‘_rathe_’]

hrǣw I. (ā, ēa) nm. gs. hrǣs _living body_: _corpse, carcase, carrion_.
II. = hrēaw I.

hrǣwīc (hrēa-) n. _place of corpses_, B 1214.

hrāfyll m. _slaughter_, B 277.

hrāgīfre _deadly_, WW 408^10.

hrāgra m. _heron_, #Gl#.

hramgealla = ramgealla

hrāmig = hrēmig

hramma m. _cramp, spasm_.

hram-sa (o) m., -se f. _onion, garlic_, _Ep, Lcd, WW_. [‘_rams_,’
‘_ramson_’]

hramsacrop m. _head of wild garlic_, #Gl#.

hran (o) m. _whale_, #Gl#.

hrān I. m. _reindeer_, AO. II. pret. 3 sg. of hrīnan.

hrand I. = rand. II. pret. 3 sg. of hrindan.

hrandsparwa (o^1) m. _sparrow_, MtL 10^29.

hranfix (o) m. _whale_, B 540.

hrānhund? m. _deerhound_? v. LL 2·117.

hranmere (o) m. _sea_, #Met# 5^10.

hranrād † f. _(whale’s-road), sea_.

hratele f. _‘bobonica’ (plant)_, WW 296^2.

hratian _to rush, hasten_, OET (= hradian?).

hraðe (æ, e) adv. comp. hraðor, superl. hraðost _hastily, quickly,
promptly, readily, immediately, soon_, _Æ, B, Bo, Cr, VPs_; CP: _too
soon_, _Bo_. swā h. swā _as soon as_, _Æ_. [‘_rathe_,’ ‘_rather_,’
‘_rathest_’]

hraðer = hreðer

hraðian = hradian

hrāw = hrǣw

hrāwērig _weary in body_, #Ph# 554.

hrāwlic = hrēowlic

hrēa I. f. _indigestion_? #Lcd# 94b. [hrēaw I.] II. = hrēaw I. and II.

hrēac m. _‘rick,’ heap, stack_, _TC, WW_.

hrēaccopp m. _top of a rick_, LL 453[21,4].

hrēacmete m. _food given to the labourers on completing a rick_, LL
452´.

-hrēad v. earm-hr. [hrēoðan]  [[variant of “hrēðan”?]]

hrēaf == rēaf

hrēam m. _noise, outcry, alarm_, _Æ, CP_: _cry, lamentation, sorrow_,
_B, Cr_. [‘_ream_’]

hrēamig _clamorous_: _lamenting_.

hrēanes = hrēohnes

hrēas pret. 3 sg. of hrēosan.

hrēat pret. 3 sg. of hrūtan.

hreaðemūs (a^2) f. _bat_.

hreaðian (#VPs#) = hradian

hrēaw I. (ēo) ‘_raw_,’ _Æ, Lcd_. II. = hrǣw nm. III. pret. 3 sg. of
hrēowan.

hrēaw- = hrēow-

hrēawde pret. 3 sg. _was raw_, WW 215^43 (rēaw-).

hrēawīc = hrǣwīc

hrēawnes I. f. _rawness, crudity_, OEG 3283. II. = hrēownes

+hrec = +rec

hrēc- = hrǣc-

hred (#KGl#) = hræd

-hreda v. æfreda.

hreddan _to free from, recover, rescue, save_, _Cr_; Æ: _take away_.
[‘_redd_’]

hreddere m. _defender_, NC 303.

hreddung (æ) f. _salvation, liberation_, Æ.

hredmōnað = hrēðmōnað

±hrēfan _to roof_, Æ. [hrōf]

hrefn = (1) hræfn; (2) hæfern

hrefnan = ræfnan

hrefncynn = hræfncynn

hregresi? _groin_, MLN 11·333; ZDA 33·244.

hrēh = hrēoh

hrem = hræfn I.

hrēman I. _to boast_. [_Ger._ rühmen] II. = hrīman

hrēmig † _boasting, vaunting, exulting_.

hremm == hræfn I.

±hremman _to hinder, cumber_, Æ.

hremming f. _hindrance, obstacle_.

hremn = hræfn I.

hrenian _to smell of, be redolent of_, #Sc# 106^5.

hrēo = hrēoh, hrēow

hrēocan = rēocan

hrēod n. _‘reed,’ rush_, _Æ, BH, Gl_; CP; Mdf.

±hrēodan^2 _to adorn_ (only in pp. ±hroden).

hrēodbedd n. ‘_reed-bed_,’ _Æ_.

hrēodcynn n. _kind of reed_, NC 303.

hrēod-ig, -iht, -ihtig (e^2) _reedy_.

hrēodwæter n. _reedy marsh_, #Nar# 20^23.

hrēof _rough, scabby, leprous_, _Whale_; CP. as sb. = _leper_.
[‘_reof_’]

-hrēofian v. ā-hr.

hrēofl I. f. _scabbiness, leprosy_, CP. II. adj. _leprous_.

hrēofla m. _roughness of the skin, leprosy_, Æ: _leper_, Æ. [hrēof]

hrēof-lic, -lig (Æ) _leprous_.

hrēofnes f. _leprosy_, Æ.

hrēofol, hrēoful = hrēofl I.

hrēog = hrēoh

hrēoh (ē) I. adj. _rough, fierce, wild, angry_, _Met_; Æ, AO, CP:
_disturbed, troubled, sad_ (v. hrēow): _stormy, tempestuous_, _B, Bo,
Chr_. [‘_reh_’] II. n. _stormy weather, tempest_.

hrēohful _stormy_, ES 39·349.

hrēohlic _stormy, tempestuous_, W 136^27.

hrēohmōd _savage, ferocious_: _sad, troubled_.

hrēohnes (ēa) f. _rough weather, tempest, storm_, Æ.

hrēol sb. ‘_reel_,’ _A, WW_; Æ.

hrēon- = rēon-

hrēones = (1) hrēohnes; (2) hrēownes

hrēop pret. 3 sg. of hrōpan.

hreopian = hrepian

hrēorig adj. _in ruins_, #Ruin# 3. [hrēosan]

±hrēosan^2 _to fall, sink, fall down, go to ruin_, _Æ, B, Cr, VPs_; AO,
CP: _rush_. [‘_reose_’]

hrēosendlic _perishable_.

hrēosian = hrēowsian

hrēosð (#KGl#) pres. 3 sg. of hrēosan.

-hrēoða (ē, ēa) v. bord-, scild-hr.

hrēoung (īu) f. _hardness of breathing, asthma_.

±hrēow I. f. _sorrow, regret, penitence, repentance, penance_, _B, Bl,
CP, Cr_. [‘_rue_’] II. _sorrowful, repentant_. III. adj. = hrēoh? IV. =
hrēaw I. and III.

hrēowan^2 (often impersonal w. d. pers.) _to affect (a person) with
regret or contrition_, _Bo, CP, Gen, LL_: _distress, grieve_, _Cr, Gen_:
(intr.) _be penitent, repent_, MkL. [‘_rue_,’ ‘_i-rew_’]

hrēowcearig † _troubled, sad_.

hrēowende _penitent_, _LkL_ (æ). [‘_rueing_’]

hrēowesung = hrēowsung

hrēowian _to repent_, MkL 1^15.

hrēowig _sorrowful, sad_, #Gen# 799.

hrēowigferhð † _sad, sorrowful_.

hrēowigmōd † _sad, sorrowful_.

hrēowlic (ī, ȳ) _grievous, pitiful, sad, wretched, miserable, cruel_,
_Chr, Ps_. adv. -līce, _AO, Chr_.

hrēownes (ēa) f. _penitence, contrition, repentance_, _LL, Gl_; CP.
[‘_rueness_,’ ‘_rewniss_’]

hrēowon = rēowon pret. pl. of rōwan.

hrēowsende = hrēosende  [[form of “hrēosan”]]

±hrēowsian (ȳ) _to feel sorrow or penitence_, _AO, Mt_; CP. [‘_reusie_’]

hrēowsung f. _repentance, penitence, sorrow_, _CP, Lk_; Æ. [‘_reusing_’]

±hrepian (eo), hreppan _to touch, treat_, _Mt_; Æ: _attack_, #Bk# 6.
[‘_repe_’]

hrepsung (ÆL) = repsung

hrepung f. _sense of touch, touch_, Æ.

hrēr _lightly boiled_, _Lcd_. [‘_rear_’]

±hrēran (tr.) _to move, shake, agitate_. [hrōr; _Ger._ rühren]

hrērednes (ȳ) f. _haste_, #LPs# 51^6.

hrēremus f. _bat_, _WW_. [‘_rearmouse_’; hrēran]

hrērnes (ȳ) f. _disturbance, commotion, tempest_.

hresl = hrisil  [[headword spelled “hrīsel”]]

+hresp n. _tearing, destruction_, NC 294.

+hrespan _to tear_, #PPs# 43^12.

hrēst = hrȳst pres. 3 sg. of hrēosan.

hreð = hræd

hrēð † mn. _victory, glory_.

hrēða m. _covering of goat-skin_, #Gl#.

hrēðan _to exult, rejoice_, #Ex# 573.

hreðe = hraðe

hrēðe = rēðe

hrēðēadig † _glorious, victorious_.

hrēðemōnað = hrēðmōnað

hreðer † (a, æ) m. _breast, bosom_: _heart, mind, thought_: _womb_.

hreðerbealo n. _heart-sorrow_, B 1343.

hreðercofa m. _breast_, #Cr# 1323.

hreðerglēaw _wise, prudent_, #Ex# 13.

hreðerloca † m. _breast_.

-hrēðig v. ēad-, sige-, will-hr.  [[headword spelled “wilhrēðig”]]

hrēðlēas _inglorious_, #Gu# 878.

hrēðmōnað m. _month of March_.

hrēðnes f. _cruelty, inclemency_, N, ÆP 136^23.

hreðor = hreðer

hrēðsigor m. _glorious victory_, B 2583.

hricg == hrycg

hrīcian _to cut, cut to pieces_, ÆL 23^73.

hricsc _rick, wrench, sprain_, #Lcd# 27a.

hriddel n. _‘riddle,’ sieve_, _LL_ 455[17].

hrīder (_Gl_), hridder (_Æ_) n. _sieve_. [‘_ridder_’]

hrīdrian _to sift, winnow_, _Lk_. [‘_ridder_’]

+hrīered _destroyed_, WW 496^18.

hrīewð pres. 3 sg. of hrēowan.

hrif n. _belly, womb_, Æ, AO.

+hrifian _to bring forth_, #LPs# 7^15.

+hrifnian _to tear off_, AO 142^26.

hriftēung f. _pain in the bowels_, WW 112^23.

hrīfðo f. _scurfiness_, #Lcd# 90b. [hrēof]

hrifwærc (e^2) m. _pain in the bowels_, WW 112^23.

hrifwund _wounded in the belly_, LL 6[61].

hrig == hrycg

hrīm m. _‘rime,’ hoar-frost_, _Ph_; Æ.

hrīman (ē, ȳ) _to cry out, shout, rave_, _Æ_ (ȳ), _CP_ (ē), _JnL_ (ē):
_bewail, lament_. [‘_reme_’; hrēam]

-hrīman v. be-hr.

hrīmceald _icy cold_, #Wa# 4.

hrīmforst m. _hoar-frost_, #LPs# 77^47 (rīm-).

hrīmgicel m. _icicle_, #Seaf# 17.

hrīmig _rimy, frosty_, #Bl#.

hrīmigheard _frozen hard_, #Rd# 88^7.

+hrin n. _morsel_, #EPs# 147^17.

+hrīn (NG) = +rīn = +rēn

hrīnan^1 (w. a. g. or d.) _to touch, lay hold of, reach, seize, strike_,
_Ps_. [‘_rine_’]

hrincg == hring

hrind = rind

hrindan^3 _to thrust, push_, #Rd# 55^4.

hrine m. _sense of touch_.

±hrinenes f. _touch, contact_, BH.

hring I. m. _ring, link of chain, fetter, festoon_, _B, CP, G, Lcd_:
_circle, circular group_, _Ph_: _border, horizon_, _Gen_: (†) (pl.)
_rings of gold (as ornaments and as money)_: (†) _corslet_, B: _circuit
(of a year)_, _cycle, course_: _orb, globe_. II. † m. (only in wōpes
hr.) _sound_.

hringan _to ‘ring,’ sound, clash_, _B, Sol_: _announce by bells_, _RB_.

hringbān n. _ring-shaped bone_, _WW_ 157. [‘_ringbone_’]

hringboga m. _coiled serpent_, B 2561.

hringe f. _ring_.

hringed † _made of rings_.

hringedstefna † m. _ring-prowed ship_.

hring-fāg, -fāh _ring-spotted, variegated_.

hringfinger m. ‘_ring-finger_,’ _Lcd, WW_.

hringgewindla m. _sphere_, WW 426^25.

hringīren n. _ring mail_, B 322.

hringloca m. _coat of ring-mail_, #Ma# 145.

hring-mǣl ‡, -mǣled ‡ _adorned with a ring (of a sword)_.

hringmere n. _bath_, #Ruin# 455.

hringnaca m. _ring-prowed ship_, B 1863.

hringnett n. _ring-mail_, B 1889.

hringsele † m. _hall in which rings are bestowed_.

hringsetl n. _circus_, OEG.

hringsittende _sitting round, looking on_, OEG 65.

hringðegu † f. _receiving of rings_.

hringweorðung f. _honouring by the gift of rings_, B 3017.

hringwīsan adv. _ringwise, in rings_, #Nar# 16^1.

hrīning f. _touch_, _JnL_. [v. ‘_rine_’]

+hriorde (w) = +reorde  [[form of “±reord”?]]

hrīp- = rīp-

hrīs n. _twig, branch_. [_Ger._ reis]

hrisc = risc

hrīscan = hrȳscan

hrīseht _bushy, bristly_, WW 513^8.

hrisel = rysel

hrīsel, hrīs(i)l f? _shuttle_: _bone of the lower arm, radius_.
[hrisian]

  [[Spelled “hrisil”, “hrisl” in first edition: see entry for
  “hresl”.]]

hrisian (y) (tr. and intr.) _to shake, move, be shaken, clatter_, _An,
B, Ps, VPs_. [‘_rese_’]

hrīsig (rȳsig) _bushy_, OEG 8^337.

hrīst pres. 3 sg. of hrēosan.

hristende, hristlende _noisy, creaky_.

hristle f. _rattle_, WW 391^18.

hristung f. _shaking, quivering, rattling noise_, #Lcd# 97a.

hrið (u) m. _fever_, #Lcd# 80a.

hrīð I. ‡ f. _snow-storm, tempest_. II. = hrīðer

hriðādl f. _fever_, #Lcd# 80a.

hrīðer (ȳ) n. _neat cattle, ox, bull, cow, heifer_, _Bl, Ct, Lcd, WW_.
[‘_rother_’]

hrīðeren _of cattle_, _Lcd_. [‘_rotheren_’]

hrīðerfrēols (ȳ) m. _cattle-festival_, OEG 4719.

hrīðerhēawere (y) m. _butcher_, Æ.

hrīðerheord (ȳ) _herd of cattle_, _Æ_. [v. ‘_rother_’]

hrīðerhyrde (ȳ) m. _herdsman_, Æ.

hrīðfald m. _cattle-pen_.

hrīðheorde (ie) = hrīðerhyrde

hriðian _to shake, be feverish, have a fever_, Æ.

hrīðig (ȳ) _storm-beaten_? _ruined_? #Wa# 77. [hrīð]

hriðing f. _fever_, #Lcd# 96b.

hrīung = hrēoung

hrīw- = hrēow-

hrīwð pres. 3 sg. of hrēowan.

hrōc m. ‘_rook_,’ _Cp, ÆL_.

hrōd = rōd

hroden I. (±) _covered, adorned, ornamented_ (pp. of hrēodan). II. =
roden  [[II. Cross-reference uncertain.]]

hroder = rodor

hrōf m. _‘roof,’ ceiling_, _Æ, B, Cr, G_; AO, CP _top, summit_, _Bo, Cr,
Mk_: _heaven, sky_, _Cr_.

hrōffæst _with a firm roof_, #Met# 7^6.

hrōflēas (rōf-) _roofless_, WW 186^30.

hrōfsele m. _roofed hall_, B 1515.

hrōfstān m. _roof stone_, ÆH 1·508.

hrōftīgel f. _roofing tile_, WW.

hrōftimber n. _material for roofing_, OEG 2256.

hrōfwyrhta m. _roof-maker, builder_, WW.

hromsa = hramsa

hron == hran

hrop = rop

hrōp m. _clamour, outcry, lamentation_, _Bl_. [‘_rope_’]

hrōpan^7 † _to shout, proclaim_: _cry out, scream, howl_, _Gu, Ps_.
[‘_rope_’]

-hrops v. ofer-hr.

hropwyrc = ropwærc

hrōr _stirring, busy, active_: _strong, vigorous, brave_.

+hror n. _calamity, plague, ruin_, BH 284^4. [hrēosan]

±hroren pp. of hrēosan.

+hrorenes f. _downfall, ruin_, #LPs# 31^4.

+hrorenlic _perishable, transitory, unstable_, NC 294; MFH.

hrōse = rōse

hrōst m. _perch, ‘roost,’_ _LL_ 454[11].

hrōstbēag m. _woodwork (of a roof)_, #Ruin# 32.

hrot m. _scum_, #Lcd# 84a.

hrōðer = hrōðor

hrōðgirela m. _crown_, #RPs# 20^4.

hroðhund (A 8·450) = roðhund

hrōðor † m. _solace, joy, pleasure_: _benefit_.

hrūm m. _soot_, #Shr#, WW.

-hrūmian v. be-hr.

hrūmig _sooty_, WW 362^12.

hrung f. _cross-bar, spoke_, _Rd_ 23^10. [‘_rung_’]

hruron pret. pl. of hrēosan.

hrurul ‘_deciduus_,’ BDS 30·11^33.

hrūse † f. _earth, soil, ground_.

hrūt (u?) ‘_balidus_’ (_validus_?), WW 361^13.

hrūtan^5 _to make a noise, whiz, snore_, _Æ, Cp_. [‘_rout_’]

hruð = hrið

hrūðer = hrīðer

+hrūxl n. _noise, tumult_, v. ES 39·344.

hrūxlian (rūx-) _to make a noise_, MtR 9^23.

hryc = hrycg

-hrycce v. corn-hr.  [[variant of “cornhwicce”]]

hrycg (i) m. _back, spine_, _Æ, CP, Lcd_; AO: _‘ridge,’ elevated
surface_, _B, Ct, Lk, Ps_; Mdf.

hrycgbān n. _back-bone, spine_, _Ps_. [‘_ridge-bone_’]

hrycgbrǣdan (hrig-) pl. _flesh on each side of the spine_, #Lcd#
3·118^24.

hrycghǣr n. _hair on an animal’s back_, #Lcd# 1·360^19.

hrycghrægl (i) n. _mantle_, TC 529^10.

hrycg-mearg (i, -mearð) n. _spinal marrow_, WW 292^7.

hrycgmerglið n. _spine_, WW 265^23.

hrycgrib (i) n. _rib_, WW.

hrycg-rible, -riple _flesh on each side of the spine_, WW.

hrycgweg m. _‘ridge-way,’ road along a ridge_, _Ct_.

hrycigan _to plough over again_, GPH 398.

hryding f. _clearing, patch of cleared land_, WW 147^12.

hrȳfing f. _scab_, #Lcd# 32b. [hrēof]

hryg = hrycg

hrȳman (ē, ī) _to cry out, shout, rave_, _Æ, CP_: _bewail, lament_,
_JnL_ (ē). [‘_reme_’]

hrȳme = hrūm

hrympelle = rimpel

+hryne = +ryne

hryre I. m. _fall, ruin, destruction, decay_, _Æ, B, Bo_; AO, CP.
[hrēosan] II. _perishable_, Æ. [‘_rure_’]

hrȳre- = hrēr-, hrēre-

hrȳscan _to creak_, v. ES 39·344.

hrysel = rysel

hrysian, hryssan = hrisian

hryst = hyrst

hrȳst pres. 3 sg. of hrēosan.

hrystan = hyrstan

hrȳte (y?) ‘_balidinus_,’ WW 163^18 (cp. hrūt).

hrȳðer == hrīðer

hrȳðig = hrīðig

hryðða = ryðða

hrȳwlic = hrēowlic

hrȳwsian = hrēowsian

hrȳwð pres. 3 sg. of hrēowsian.

hū adv. ‘_how_,’ CP, Æ. hū gerādes; hū meta _how_. hū gēares _at what
time of year_. hū nyta _wherefore_. hū ne dōð...? _do not...?_ hū
nys...? _is not...?_: (with comparatives) _the_: (±) _in some way or
other_, _Shr_: hū ne nū ‘_nonne_.’

hūcs, hūcx = hūsc

hūdenian _to shake_, CP 461^16.

hūf- = ūf I. and II.

hūfe _covering for the head_, _Cp, WW_. [‘_houve_’; _Ger._ haube]

hūfian _to put a covering on the head_, Æ.

hū-hwega, -hugu _somewhere about_. h. swā _about_.

hui! huig! interj.

huilpe = hwilpe

hulc m. _‘hulk,’ ship_, _LL, WW_; Æ: _hut_, _Æ, LL, WW_.

hulfestre f. _plover_, WW 132^12.

hūlic pron. _of what sort_.

hulpon pret. pl. of helpan.

hulu f. _husk, pod_, _WW_. [‘_hull_’]

hūluco (AO) = hūlic

huma = uma  [[headword spelled “ūma”]]

humele = hymele

hūmen (VHy) = ȳmen  [[headword spelled “ymen”]]

hūmeta adv. _in what way, how_, Æ.

huncettan _to limp, halt_, #RPs# 17^46.

hund I. n. _hundred_, _A, AO, Mk_; Æ; (in comp.) _decade_. [‘_hund_’]
II. m. _hound, dog_, _Bo, CP, Jud_; Æ, AO.

hundæhtatig (_VPs_) = hundeahtatig

hundællef- (-ændlæf-) = hundendlufon-

hundeahtatig num. ‘_eighty_,’ Æ.

hundeahtatigwintere _eighty years old_, Æ.

hundend-lufontig, -leftig (æ^2) _hundred and ten_.

hund-endlufontigoða, -ælleftiogoða _hundred and tenth_, CP.

hundesbēo f. _dog’s parasite_, WW 380^21.

hundescwelcan pl. _colocynth berries_, WW 364^31.

hundesflēoge f. _dog’s parasite_, AO.

hundeshēafod n. _snapdragon_, #Lcd#.

hundeslūs f. _dog’s parasite_, Æ.

hundes-micge, -tunge f. _cynoglossum (plant)_, #Lcd#.

hundeswyrm m. _dog’s parasite, dog’s worm_, WW 122^25.

hundfeald _hundredfold_, _Æ_. [‘_hundfold_’]

hundfrēa m. _centurion_, MtL 22^19 mg.

hundlic _of or like dogs, canine_, Æ.

hundnigontēoða _ninetieth_, Æ.

hundnigontig _ninety_, Æ.

hundnigontigwintre _ninety years old_, Æ.

hund-red, -rað n. _‘hundred’ (number)_, _G, Ps, WW, MtL_ (að); Æ:
_hundred (political district)_: _hundred-court, or assembly of the men
of a hundred_. hundredes ealdor, mann _head of the hundred court,
centurion_.

hundredgemōt n. _hundred-moot_, LL.

hundredmann m. _centurion_, Æ.

hundredpenig m. _contribution levied by the sheriff or lord of the
hundred for the support of his office_, TC 432; 433.

hundreð (_MkR_) = hundred

hundseofontig num. _seventy_, Æ.

hundseofontigfeald _seventy-fold_, Æ.

hundseofontigoða _seventieth_, CP (io^2, io^4).

hundseofontigwintre _seventy years old_, Æ.

hundtēontig _hundred_, Æ.

hundtēontig-feald, -fealdlic _hundredfold_. adv. -līce, W 237^9.

hundtēontiggēare _being of the age of a hundred_, Æ.

hundtēontigwintre _a hundred years old_, NC 303.

hundtwelftig num. _hundred and twenty_, Æ, AO.

hundtwentig num. _hundred and twenty_, Æ.

hundtwentigwintre _aged a hundred and twenty_, Æ.

hundwealh m. _servant who looked after dogs_, WW 111^25 (æ^2).

hundwelle _a hundred-fold_, MtL 13^8.

hundwintre _aged a hundred years_, Æ.

hūne f. _horehound_, #Lcd#.

hū ne nū ‘_nonne_,’ #RPs# 52^5; Hy 6^6.

hunger = hungor

hungerbiten _hunger-bitten, starving_, #Chr# 1096.

hungergēar n. _famine year_, Æ.

hungerlǣwe _famishing, starving_, LHy 3^5.

hungerlic _hungry, famishing_, WW.

hungor m. _‘hunger,’ desire_, _An, Cr, VPs, WW_; CP: _famine_, _Æ, Mt,
Chr_.

hungrig _‘hungry,’ famishing_, _MtL, Gu_; Æ, AO.

hungur = hungor

hunig n. ‘_honey_,’ _AO, VPs_; Æ, CP.

hunigæppel m. _pastille_? _ball of honey_? OET (Cp 1512).

hunigbǣre _honeyed_, OEG.

hunigbin f. _vessel for honey_, LL 455[17].

hunigcamb f. ‘_honey-comb_,’ _Sc_ 50^9.

hunigflōwende _flowing with honey_, #Gu# 1250.

huniggafol n. _rent paid in honey_, LL 448[4,5].

hunigsūge f. _honeysuckle_? _clover_? _privet_? _Cp, WW_.
[‘_honeysuck_’]

hunigswēte _‘honey-sweet,’ mellifluous_, _Æ_.

hunigtēar m. _honey which drips from the comb_.

hunigtēar-en, -lic _nectar-like_, #Gl#.

huni-sūge, -sūce = hunigsūge

hūnspora m. _‘dolon,’ pike_? Cp 356#d#.

hunta m. _huntsman_, Æ, AO: _a kind of spider_, _Lcd_ 54a. [‘_hunt_’]

huntað = huntoð

huntaðfaru f. _hunting expedition_, LL 252[22].

±huntian, huntgan _to ‘hunt’_ (intr.), _Lcd, WW_; (tr.) _Æ_.

hunticge f. _huntress_, A 6·188.

huntigspere n. _hunting-spear_, _WW_.

huntigystre = hunticge

huntoð, huntnoð, huntnold, huntnað m. _hunting, what is caught by
hunting, game, prey_, _Æ, Ct, Lcd_; AO. [‘_hunteth_’]

huntung f. ‘_hunting_,’ _WW_: _a hunt, chase_, _DR_: _what is hunted,
game_, ES 37·188.

hūnðyrlu np. _holes in the upper part of a mast_, WW 288^15.

hūon == hwōn

hupbān, huppbān = hypbān

-hupian v. on-h.

hupseax n. _hip-sword, short sword, dagger_. [hup- = hype-]

hurnitu = hyrnetu  [[under “hyrnet”]]

hūru adv. _at least, at all events, however, nevertheless, yet, even,
only_, _LL_; Æ: _about, not less than_, _AO_: _surely, truly, certainly,
indeed, especially_, CP. h. swīðost _most particularly_. [‘_hure_’]

hūruðinga _at least, especially_, Æ.

hūs n. ‘_house_,’ _B, G, RB_; Æ, AO, CP: _dwelling-place_, _El, Ph_:
_household_, _JnL_: _family, race_, _Ps_.

±hūsa m. _member of a household_, G.

hūsærn n. _dwelling-house_, NC 303.

hūsbonda (ō^2?) m. _householder, master of a house_, _Mt, Chr_.
[‘_husband_’]

hūsbonde f. _mistress of a house_, Æ.

hūsbryce (e^2, i^2) m. _housebreaking, burglary_, _LL_.
[‘_housebreach_’]

hūsbrycel m. _housebreaking, burglary_, WW 205^28.

hūsbryne m. _burning of a house_, Ct.

hūsbunda = hūsbonda

hūsc n. _mockery, derision, scorn, insult_, _Gen, WW_. [‘_hux_’]

hūscarl m. _one of the household corps, member of the king’s bodyguard_,
_Chr, KC_. [‘_housecarl_’; _ON._]

hūsclic _shameful, ignominious_, Æ. adv. -līce.

hūscword n. _insulting speech_, _An_. [v. ‘_hux_’]

hūsel = hūsl

hūselbox _receptacle of the host_, ÆP 178^6.

hūselhālgung f. _attendance at the eucharist, communicating_, Æ.

hūsellāf f. _remains of the eucharist_, LL (358^22).

hūselportic (u^2) m. _sacristy_, BH 94^10.

hūsfæst adj. _occupying a house_, Ct.

hūshefen m. _ceiling_, WW 432^8. [heofon]

hūshlāford m. _master of the house_, Æ.

hūshlēow n. _housing, shelter_, LL (282^25); W 74^4.

±hūsian _to ‘house,’ receive into one’s house_, _LL_.

hūsincel n. _habitation_, DR, #VPs#.

hūsl (-sel, -sul) n. _‘housel,’ eucharist, Lord’s supper_, _Æ, BH_: _the
host_, _LL_: _a sacrifice_, _MtL_ 12^7.

hūslbearn (-ul) n. _communicant_, #Gu# 531.

hūsldisc m. _housel-dish, paten_.

hūsl-fæt n. nap. -fatu _sacrificial or sacramental vessel_.

hūslgang m. _going to, partaking of the eucharist_, Æ.

hūslgenga m. _communicant_, v. LL 2·263.

hūslian _to administer the sacrament_, _LL_. [‘_housel_’]

hūslðēn m. _acolyte_, LL.

hūslung f. _administration of the sacrament_, _Æ_. [‘_houseling_’]

hūslwer (-el) m. _communicant_, #Gu# 768.

hūsrǣden f. _household, family_, #LPs#.

±hūsscipe m. _house (e.g. of Israel)_, _race_.

hūsstede m. _site of a house_, #Lcd#.

hūsting n. _tribunal, court (esp. in London)_, _Chr_. [‘_husting_’]

hūsul = hūsl

hūsul- = hūs(e)l-

hūswist f. _home_, #LPs# 5^8.

hūð f. _plunder, booty, prey_, Æ.

hūx == hūsc

hwā mf., hwæt n. pron. (interrog.) _‘who,’ what_, Æ, AO, CP: (indef.)
_any one, some one, anything, something_, Æ, AO, CP: _each_. swā hwā swā
_whosoever_. swā hwæt swā _whatsoever_. tō hwǣm _wherefore_.

+hwā _each one, every one, any one, whoever_.

+hwǣde _slight, scanty, small, young_, Æ.

hwæder (CP) = hwider

+hwǣdnes f. _fewness, insignificance_: _fineness, subtlety_.

hwǣg (ē) n? ‘_whey_,’ LL.

hwæl I. (usu. hwal-in obl. cases) m. _‘whale,’ walrus_, Æ, AO. II. pret.
3 sg. of hwelan. III. = hwall. IV. (#Ex# 161) = wæln?

hwælan _like a whale_? #Sol# 263.

hwælhunta m. _whale-fisher, whaler_, Æ, AO.

hwælhuntað m. _whale-fishery, whaling_, AO.

hwælmere † m. _sea_.

hwælweg (wæl-) m. _sea_, #Seaf# 63.

hwæm = hwemm

hwǣm ds. of hwā, hwæt.

+hwǣmlic _each, every_, LkL 9^23.

-hwǣnan v. ā-hw.

hwæne = hwone, asm. of hwā.

hwǣne = hwēne

hwænne, hwæne (‘_when_’) = hwonne

hwær == hwer

hwǣr (ā) adv. and conj. _‘where,’ whither_, Æ: _somewhere, anywhere,
everywhere_, Æ, CP. wel h. _nearly everywhere_. swā hw. swā
_wheresoever, wherever_. elles hw. _elsewhere_. hwǣr...hwǣr
_here...there_.

+hwǣr _everywhere, in all directions_, Æ: _on every occasion, always_.

hwærf == hwearf

hwærfan = hwierfan

hwærflung = hwyrflung

hwæs I. _sharp, piercing_, #Cr# 1444. II. gs. of hwā, hwæt.

hwǣsan^7 (ē) _to ‘wheeze,’ breathe hard_, Æ.

hwǣst? _blowing_, v. OEG 2452n.

hwǣstrian (ā) _to murmur, mutter_, NG.

hwǣstrung (ā) f. _murmur, whispering, muttering_.

hwæt I. (neut. of hwā, which see) adv. _why, wherefore_: _indeed,
surely, truly, for_: interj. _what! lo!_ (calls attention to a following
statement) _ah! behold!_ Æ. II. adj. (obl. cases have hwat-) _sharp,
brisk, quick, active_: _bold, brave_, AO. III. (CP) pres. 3 sg. of
hwettan.

+hwæt (_Cr_) neut. of +hwā. [‘_i-hwat_’]

hwǣte (ē) m. _‘wheat,’ corn_, Æ, CP. [hwīt]

hwætēadig _very brave_, #El# 1195?

hwǣtecorn n. _corn of wheat_, #Lcd# 13a.

hwǣtecynn n. _wheat_, #PPs# 147^3.

hwǣtegryttan pl. _wheaten groats_, WW 141^20.

hwǣtehealm m. _wheat straw_, #Lcd# 49a.

hwǣteland m. _wheat-land_, KC 3·159^21.

hwǣtemelu n. _wheat-meal_, #Lcd# 126a.

hwǣten ‘_wheaten_,’ Æ.

hwǣtesmedma m. _wheat-meal_, #Lcd#.

hwǣtewæstm m. _corn_, #CPs# 77^25.

hwæthwara = hwæthwugu

hwæt-hwugu, -hwigu, -hugu, -hwega, -hwegu, -hwygu pron. and adv.
_somewhat, slightly, a little, something_.

hwæt-hwugununges (CP), -hweganunges, -huguningas adv. _somewhat_.

hwætlīce adv. _quickly, promptly_.

hwætmōd † _bold, courageous_.

±hwætnes f. _quickness, activity_.

hwætrēd ‡ _firm, determined_. [rēd = rǣd]

hwætscipe m. _activity, vigour, boldness, bravery_, AO, CP.

hwæðer (e) I. adj. pron. _which of two, ‘whether,’_ Æ. swā hw. swā
_whichever_. hwæðer...ðe _whether...or_: _each of two, both_: _one of
two, either_, CP. II. conj. (with subj.) and adv. _whether_, Æ, CP.

+hwæðer _both, either, each_.

hwæðere, hwæð(ð)re I. adv. _however, yet, nevertheless, still_, Æ, AO,
CP. II. = hwæðer adv.

+hwæðere _nevertheless_.

+hwæðeres _everywhere_.

hwal- v. hwæl.

hwalf = hwealf I.

hwall (= æ) _forward, bold_, WW 499^17; 532^32. [hwelan]

hwām ds. of hwā, hwæt.

hwamm (o) m. _corner, angle, prominence_, Æ, CP: _porch_.

hwamstān (o^1) m. _corner-stone_, MtL 21^42.

hwan = hwon instr. of hwæt.

hwān = hwām

hwanan = hwanon

hwane = hwone asm. of hwā.

hwanne = hwonne

hwanon, hwanone adv. _whence_, Æ.

+hwanon adv. _from every quarter_.

hwanonhwegu adv. _from anywhere_.

hwār, hwāra = hwǣr

hwāst- = hwǣst-

hwasta? m. _eunuch_, Mt, WW.

hwat- v. hwæt.

hwat-a I. m. _augur, soothsayer_, Æ. II. (æ), -an fpl. _augury,
divination_.

hwatend ‘_iris Illyrica_’ (_plant_).

hwatung f. _augury, divination_, LL.

hwēal (WW 162^25) = ðwēal

hwealf I. _concave, hollow, arched, vaulted_. II. f. _vault_. [cp.
_Ger._ gewölbe]

hwealhafoc = wealhhafoc  [[headword spelled “-hāfoc”]]

hwealp = hwelp

hwearf I. † m. _crowd, troop, concourse_. [hweorfan] II. (a, e, eo) m.
_exchange_: _what is exchanged_: (+) _vicissitude_: _error_, MtR 27^64:
_going, distance_, LkLR 24^13. III. pret. 3 sg. of hweorfan.

hwearfan = hwierfan

hwearfian _to turn, roll or toss about, revolve, wave_, CP: _change_:
_wander, move, pass by_, AO.

hwearflic _changing, mutable, transitory_: _quick, agile_, #Fin# 35?
adv. -līce _in turn_.

+hwearfnes f. _conversion_, CP 447^13.

hwearft m. _revolution, circuit, circle_: _lapse (of time)_.

hwearftlian (y) _to revolve, turn round_, Æ.

hwearfung f. _revolution_: _change, vicissitude_: _exchange_.

hwebbung = webbung

hweder = hwider

+hwēdnes (#KGl#) = +hwǣdnes

hwēg = hwǣg

hwegl = hwēol

hwelan^4 (y) _to roar, rage_.

hwelc (AO, CP) == hwilc

±hwelian, hwellan? _to suppurate_, CP: _cause to suppurate_.

hwelp (ea, y) m. _‘whelp,’ the young of an animal, cub_, AO.

hwelung f. _din_, WW 423^20.

hwem = hwemm

hwemdragen _sloping, slanting_, #Bl# 207^17.

hwemm (æ) m. _corner, angle_, Æ. [hwamm]

hwemman _to bend, turn, incline_, #Chr# 1052.

hwēne (ǣ) adv. _somewhat, a little_, Æ, AO, CP. [instr. of hwōn]

hweogl = hwēol

hwēol, hweogul, hweohl n. ‘_wheel_,’ #Bo#; Mdf.

hwēolfāg _having a circular border or decoration_, WW 375^32.

hwēollāst m. _orbit_, DHy 93^17.

hwēolrād f. _rut_, Cp 233#o#.

hwēop pret. 3 sg. of hwōpan.

+hweorf _converted_, MtR 18^3 (+werf): _active_? #Cra# 68.

hweorfa m. _whorl of a spindle_.

±hweorfan^3 (o, u) _to turn, change_. feohtan mid hweorfendum sigum _to
fight with varying success_, AO: _move, go, come_: _wander about, roam,
go about_: _turn back, return, turn from, depart_: _die_: _be
converted_.

hweorfbān (u, y) n. _joint, kneecap_.

hweorfian (e) _to return_, AS.

hwēos pret. 3 sg. of hwǣsan.

hweoða = hwiða

hweowl, hweowol = hwēol

hwer (æ, y) m. _pot, basin, bowl, kettle, caldron_, Æ.

+hwēr = +hwǣr

hwerbān = hweorfbān

hwerf I. m. _‘wharf,’ dam or bank to keep out water_, EC 299. II. =
hwearf

hwerf- = hwearf-, hweorf-, hwierf-

hwergen adv. only in phr. elles hwergen _elsehere_.

hwerhwette f. _cucumber_.

hwēsan (Æ) = hwǣsan

hwēt == wǣt

hwēte (#KGl#) = hwǣte

hwete-, hwet-stān m. _whetstone_, AO.

±hwettan _to ‘whet,’ sharpen, incite, encourage_, Æ, CP. [hwæt]

-hwette v. hwer-h.

hweðer = hwæðer

hweðre = hwæðere

hwī = hwȳ

hwicce f. _locker, chest, trunk_, OEG 18b^11.

hwicung f. _squeaking (of mice)_, GD 185^4 (#c#).

hwider (æ) adv. ‘_whither_,’ Æ, AO, CP. swā hw. swā _wherever,
whithersoever_.

+hwider _in every direction, everywhere, anywhere, whithersoever_.

hwiderryne adj. _directed whither_, Ln 43^33.

hwīe = hwȳ

-hwielfan (e, y) v. ā-, be-, of-hw. [hwealf]

±hwierfan (æ, e, ea, i, y) _to turn, change, convert, return_, _CP_:
_wander, move, go, depart_, AO: _exchange, barter_: (+) _overturn,
destroy_. [hwearf]

+hwierfednes (y) f. _conversion_, BH.

-hwierfere v. pening-hw.  [[headword spelled “-hwyrfere”]]

hwig = hwȳ

hwīl f. _‘while,’ time_, Æ, CP: _a long time_. hwīle (ðe) _while,
whilst, meanwhile_. nū hwīle _just now, a while ago_. ealle hwīle _all
the while_. ōðre hwīle...ōðre hwīle _at one time...at another time_.

hwilc (e, y) interrog. pron. and adj. _which, what_: (indef.)
_whosoever, whichever_: _any (one)_, _some (one)_. swā hw. swā
_whosoever, whatever_.

+hwilc _each, every (one)_, _all, many, whoever, whatever_. ānra +hw.
_each one_.

hwilchwega = hwilchwugu

hwilc-hwene, -hwone pron. _some, some one_.

hwilc-hwugu, -hugu (hwilc is declined) pron. _any, some, some one_,
AO, CP.

±hwilcnes f. _quality_, Æ.

hwīlen _passing, transitory_, #Whale# 87.

hwīlende (#Sc#), hwīlendlic (CP) = hwīlwendlic

hwileð pres. 3 sg. of hwelan.

hwīlhwega adv. _for some time_.

hwīlon (Æ) = hwīlum

hwilpe f. _curlew_? #Seaf# 21. [_Du._ wilp]

hwīlsticce n. _interval, short space of time, odd moment_, WW 420^28, GD
254^24.

hwīltīdum adv. _sometimes, at times_, Æ, CP. hwīltīdum...hwīltīdum _at
some times...at others_.

hwīlðrāg f. _period of time_, GD 243^19.

hwīlum adv. (dp. of hwīl) _‘whilom,’ sometimes, once_, Æ, CP.
hwīlum...hwīlum _now...now, at one time...at another_. [‘_whilom_’]

hwīlwende _transitory, temporary_, Æ.

hwīlwendlic _transitory, temporary, temporal_, Æ. adv. -līce, Æ.

hwimpel = wimpel

hwīnan^1 _to hiss, whizz, whistle_. [‘_whine_’]

hwinsian _to whine_, NC 303.

hwinsung f. _whining_, NC 303.

hwirfan = hwierfan

hwirfð pres. 3 sg. of hweorfan.

hwīrlic (#HGl# 434) = hwearflic

hwiscettung f. _squeaking (of mice)_, GD 185^4 (#o#).

hwisprian _to ‘whisper,’ murmur_, NG.

hwisprung f. _whispering, murmuring_, JnR 7^12.

hwistle f. _reed, whistle, pipe_.

hwistlere m. _whistler, piper_.

hwistlian _to ‘whistle,’ hiss_, #Nar# 43^17.

hwistlung f. _whistling, piping, music_.

hwīt I. ‘_white_’: _bright, radiant, glistening, flashing, clear, fair_.
II. n. _white of egg_, Æ.

±hwītan _to whiten_: _brighten, polish_.

hwītcorn n. _manna_, JnL 6^31mg.

hwīt-cwidu, -cudu m. _mastic_, #Lcd#.

hwītehlāf m. _white bread_.

hwītel (ȳ) m. _blanket, cloak_, Æ. [hwīt]

hwītfōt _white-footed_, #Gl#.

hwītian _to whiten, become white, be white_, Æ.

hwītingmelu n. _whiting-powder_, #Lcd# 119b.

hwītingtrēow n. _whitten tree_.

hwītlēac n. _onion_, WW 353^8.

hwītling m. _a kind of fish, whiting_? NC 303.

hwīt-loc ‡, -loccede ‡ _fair-haired, blonde_, #Rd#.

hwītnes f. _whiteness_, Æ, #Bl#.

hwiða m., hwiðu (eo) f? _air, breeze_, Æ, CP.

hwol? ‘_infigens_,’ OEG 37^6.

hwomm = hwamm

hwon form of instr. case of hwā, only found in adverbial phrases like
‘tō hwon, for hwon’ _why_.

hwōn I. adj. _little, few_. II. n. _a little, trifle, somewhat, a little
while_. III. adv. _somewhat_.

hwonan = hwanon

hwone asm. of hwā.

hwōnlic _little, small_, Æ. adv. -līce, _moderately, slightly,
little_, Æ.

hwōnlotum (= -hlotum) adv. _in small quantities_, #Gl#.

hwonne adv. _when, then, at some time_, CP: _at any time_. nū hw. _just
now_: _as long as, until_.

hwonon = hwanon

hwōpan^7 † _to threaten_.

hworfan = hweorfan

hwōsta m. _cough_, _WW_. [‘_hoast_?’]

hwōstan _to cough_, #Lcd# 96b (hwōsað).

hwoðerian _to foam, surge_, ÆH 2·388^19. [hwiða]

hwoðrung f. _murmur, a low sound_, OEG 26^14.

hwu (LWS) = hū

hwugudǣl m. _small part_, HL 18^346.

hwurf- = hwearf-, hweorf-, hwyrf-

hwurfon pret. pl. of hweorfan.

hwurful _fickle_, CP. [hweorfan]

hwurfulnes f. _inconstancy, mutability_, CP.

hwȳ (inst. of hwæt) adv. and conj. ‘_why_.’ tō hwȳ _wherefore_.

hwyder (Æ) = hwider

hwylan = hwelan

hwylc == hwilc

hwylca m. _tumour, boil_, WW 161^17.

hwȳlon = hwīlum

hwylp = hwelp

hwyr = hwer

hwyrf- = hweorf-, hwierf-

hwyrfel m. _circuit, exterior, higher part_? #Bl# 125^21: (_meaning
doubtful_), EC 328´.

hwyrfepōl m. _whirlpool, eddy_, WW 383^34.

hwyrflede ‘_rotundus_,’ v. OEG 23^42.

hwyrflung (æ) f. _turning, revolution, month_? v. OEG 1992: _wandering_.

hwyrfnes f. _dizziness, giddiness_, #Lcd#.

±hwyrft m. _turning, circuit, revolution, motion, course, orbit_: _way
out, outlet_. +hw. gēares _anniversary_.

hwyrftlian = hwearftlian

hwyrftweg m. _escape_, #Rd# 4^6.

hwystl- = wistl-

hwȳtel = hwītel

hȳ = hīe

+hȳan = hēan III.

±hycgan (i) _to think, consider, meditate, study_: _resolve upon,
determine, purpose_: _remember_: _hope_. h. fram _be averse to_.

hȳd I. _‘hide,’ skin_, _Chr, LL_; AO, CP, Æ. hȳde ðolian _to undergo a
flogging_. II. = hīd

+hȳd I. _furnished with a skin_, #Nar# 50^5. II. pp. of hēan. III. =
+hygd

±hȳdan I. _to ‘hide’ (‘i-hede’), conceal, preserve_, _Bo, CP_: (refl.
and intr.) _hide oneself_, _CP, Ps_: _sheath (a sword)_, _bury
(a corpse)_, Æ. II. = hēdan

hȳddern = hēddern

-hydele v. hǣwen-h.

+hȳdelicnes = +hȳðelicnes

hȳdels m. _hiding-place, cave_, _MkR, LL_. [‘_hidels_’]

hyder = hider

hȳdgild (y^2) n. _fine to save one’s skin (i.e. instead of flogging)_,
_LL_. [‘_hidegild_’]

hȳdig I. _leathern_, WW 125^35. II. = hygdig

+hȳdnes f. _comfort_, Cp 210#o#: _security_, CP 387.

hȳdscip = hȳðscip

hȳf f. ‘_hive_,’ _Cp, Lcd, WW_.

+hygd (i), hygd (at #PPs# 120^4) fn. _mind, thought_: _reflection,
forethought_.

hygdig _heedful, thoughtful, careful_: _chaste, modest_. adv. -līce
_chastely_.

hygdignes f. _chastity, modesty_, DR.

hyge (i) † m. _thought, mind, heart, disposition, intention_, _Seaf,
Da_: _courage_: _pride_, #Gen# 354. [‘_high_’]

hygebend mf. _heart-strings_, B 1878.

hygeblind _mentally blind_, #Jul# 61.

hygeblīðe † _blithe of heart, glad, joyful_.

hygeclǣne _pure in heart_, #PPs# 104^3.

hygecræft † m. _power of mind, wisdom_.

hygecræftig † _wise, prudent_.

hȳgedriht f. _band of household retainers_? #Rim# 21. [hīw]

hygefæst _wise_, #Rd# 43^14.

hygefrōd _wise_, #Gen# 1953.

hygefrōfor † f. _consolation_.

hygegǣlsa _hesitating, slow, sluggish_, #Ph# 314. [gǣlan]

hygegāl _loose, wanton_, #Rd# 13^12.

hygegār m. _wile_, #Mod# 34.

hygegēomor † _sad in mind_.

hygeglēaw † _prudent in mind_.

hygegrim _savage, cruel_, #Jul# 595.

hygelēas (e, i) _thoughtless, foolish, rash_, Æ.

hygelēaslic (i) _unbridled_, OEG 3170.

hygelēast f. _heedlessness, folly_, Æ.

hygemǣðum (i) _reverently_, B 2909.

hygemēðe _sad, saddening_, B 2442.

hygerōf † _stout-hearted, brave_.

hygerūn f. _secret_, #El# 1099.

hygesceaft f. _mind, heart_, #Gen# 288.

hygesnottor † _sagacious, wise_.

hygesorg † f. _heart sorrow, anxiety_.

hygestrang (i) _brave_, #Men# 42.

hygetēona † m. _injury, insult_.

hygetrēow f. _fidelity_, #Gen# 2367.

hygeðanc † m. _thought_.

hygeðancol † _thoughtful, wise_.

hygeðihtig (i^1) _courageous_, B 746.

hygeðrymm (i^1) m. _courage_, B 339.

hygeðrȳð (i) f. _pride, insolence_, #Gen# 2238.

hygewælm ‡ m. _agitation of mind, anger_.

hygewlanc † _haughty, proud_.

hyggean = hycgan

hȳglā (#LPs#) = hīglā

hȳhsan = hȳscan  [[headword spelled “hyscan”]]

hȳhst v. hēah.

hyht (e, i) mf. (±) _hope, trust_, _Bl, Ps_; Æ, CP: _joy, exultation_:
(±) _desire, expectation_: (+) _comfort_. [‘_hight_’]

±hyhtan (i) _to hope, trust_, _Ps_: _rejoice, exult, be glad_: _soften
(hardship)_, #Guth# 86^8. [‘_hight_’]

+hyhtendlic _to be hoped for_, GD 269^13.

hyhtful (e, i) _hopeful_: _full of joy, mirthful, pleasant, glad_.

hyhtgiefu f. _pleasing gift_, #Rim# 21.

hyhtgifa m. _giver of joy_, #El# 852.

hyhting (i^1) f. _exultation_, WW 233^42.

hyhtlēas (i^1) _unbelieving_, #Gen# 2387.

hyhtlic † _hopeful, joyful, pleasant_. adv. -līce.

+hyhtlic _commodious_.

hyhtplega † m. _joyous play, sport_.

hyhtwilla † m. _hoped-for joy_.

hyhtwynn † f. _joy of hope, joy_.

hȳhðo = hīehðu

hyl = hyll

hylc (i) m. _bend, turn_, #Gl#.

+hylced _divergent_, GPH 398.

hyld (e, i) m. _grace_, _Gen_: _loyalty, fidelity_, _Chr_ (e), _LL_.
[‘_held_’]

hyldan I. (e) = hieldan. II. _to flay, skin_, _Æ, WW_. [‘_hild_’;
hold II.]

hyldāð m. _oath of allegiance_, LL 396#b#.

hylde f. _declivity, slope_, _KC, WW_ (e). [‘_hield_’]

+hyldelic _secure, safe_, GD 348^10.

hyldemǣg † m. _near kinsman_.

hyldere m. _flayer, butcher_, #Gl#. [hold II.]

+hyldig _patient_, #SPs# 7^12.

hylding f. _curve, inclination_, WW 382^2. [heald]

hyldo f. _favour, grace, kindness, protection_: _allegiance, loyalty,
reverence_, AO, CP. [hold I.]

hyldrǣden f. _fidelity_, TC 610^31 (e^1).

hyldu (Æ) = hyldo

hylest pres. 2 sg. of helan.

hylf (Æ) = hielf

hyll I. mf. ‘_hill_,’ _Æ_; Mdf. II. = hell

hyllehāma (i) m. _‘cicada,’ cricket, grasshopper_, #Gl#.

+hylman = helmian

-hylman v. for-, ofer-h.  [[“oferhylman” only in form “oferhylmend”]]

hylp = help

hylpð pres. 3 sg. of helpan.

hylsten _baked (on the hearth)_, WW 393^31.

hylsung f. _‘tympanum,’ timbrel_? (BB 4·82), #EPs# 150^4.

hylt = hielt pres. 3 sg. of healdan.

-hylte v. hēah-h.

hylto = hielto

hylwyrt f. _‘hillwort,’ pulegium_, _WW_.

hym = him

hymblice (#Gl#) = hymlic

Hymbre sbpl. _Northumbrians_, OET 571.

hymele f. _hop plant_, WW; Mdf. [_L._ humulus]

hymelic = hymlic

hȳmen = ȳmen  [[headword spelled “ymen”]]

hymlic (e) m., hymlīce f. ‘_hemlock_,’ _Gl, Lcd, WW_.

hȳn = hēan

hȳnan (Æ) = hīenan

hynd == hind

-hynde v. six-, twelf-, twi-h.; of-hende.

hynden f. _community of 100 men_, LL.

hyndenmann m. _chief man in the community of 100 men_, LL 175; 178.

hyne = hine as. of hē.

±hyngran, hyngrian (i) _to be hungry, ‘hunger,’_ (impers.) _Æ, JnL_;
(intr.) _Cr, Lk_: (trans.) _hunger for_, Mt 5^6.

hyngrig = hungrig

hȳnnes f. _persecution_, BH 34^5. [hēan]

hynnilǣc (Ep) = ynnilēac  [[under “ynnelēac”]]

hȳnð, hȳnðu = hīenðo

+hȳpan (Æ) = +hēapian

hypbān n. _hip-bone_, WW 201^9.

hype m. ‘_hip_,’ _Bl, WW_; Æ, CP.

hȳpe f. _heap_, Æ.

hypebān = hypbān

hȳpel m. _heap, mound_, _Gl_.

hypesex = hupseax

+hypsan (#LPs# 9^25) = hyspan

hypwærc (i^1, e^2) n. _pain in the hips_, WW 113^15.

hȳr (ī) f. _‘hire,’ wages_, _Æ, LL_: _interest, usury_, Æ.

hyra gp. of hē, hēo, hit.

hȳra m. _servant, follower, mercenary, hireling_, CP.

hyran _to spit_, MkR 14^65. [cp. +horian]

±hȳran = (1) hīeran; (2) hȳrian

hyrcnian = heorcnian

hyrd f. _door_, #Gen# 2695. [_Goth._ haúrds]

hyrd-, heord-, hyrwd- = hierd-

hyrdel m. ‘_hurdle_,’ _Æ, WW_.

hyre gds. of hēo.

hȳre = hēore

hȳreborg (īe) m. _interest an money_, WW 515^1.

hȳred = hīered

hȳrefter = hēræfter

hȳre-geoc, -geoht = hȳrgeoht

hȳregilda m. _mercenary, hired servant_, WW 111^11.

hȳremann = hīeremann  [[headword spelled “hīereman”]]

hȳrgeoht n. _hired yoke of oxen_, LL 24[60].

hyrian _to imitate_, #Bo#.

hȳrian _to ‘hire’ (‘i-hire’)_, _Æ, Mt_.

hȳrigmann I. m. _hireling_, _A, Mk_. [‘_hireman_’] II. = hīeremann
  [[headword spelled “hīereman”]]

hyring f. _imitation_.

hȳrling m. ‘_hireling_,’ _Mk_ 1^20.

hȳrmann = hȳrigmann

hyrnan _to jut out like a horn_, Ct.

hyrne f. _angle, corner_, _CP, Mt_; Mdf. [‘_hern_’]

±hyrned _horned, beaked_, _Lcd_; Æ. [‘_i-horned_’]

hyrnednebba † _horny-billed, horn-beaked_. [horn]

hyrnen I. _of horn_, #LRPs# 97^6. II. _angular_, OEG 7^20.

hȳrnes = hīernes

hyrnet, hyrnetu f. ‘_hornet_,’ _Gl, WW_: _gadfly_? _WW_ 121^12.

hyrnful _angular, having many angles_, OEG 121.

hyrnig _angular_, OEG 121.

hyrnstān m. _corner-stone, keystone_, ÆH 1·106.

hȳroxa m. _hired ox_, LL 116#b#.

hyrra (#KGl#) = heorra, heorr

hȳrra I. v. hēah. II. = hȳra

hyrst † I. f. (±) _ornament, decoration, jewel, treasure_:
_accoutrements, trappings, armour_. [_Ger._ rüstung] II. m. _hillock,
eminence, height, wood, wooded eminence_, _Rd, OET_; Mdf. [‘_hurst_’]

hyrst- = hierst-

±hyrstan I. _to decorate, adorn, ornament, equip_. [_Ger._ rüsten] II.
(+) _to murmur_, LkLR 15^2. III. = hierstan

hȳrsum == hīersum

hyrtan = hiertan

hyrten = heorten

hyrð f. _skin, hide_, ES 41·323.

hyrðil (_Cp_) = hyrdel

+hȳrung f. _hiring_, WW 213^12.

hyrw- = hierw-

hys = his

hȳsan ?= hȳscan  [[headword spelled “hyscan”]]

±hyscan (ea, i) (tr.) _to jeer at, deride, reproach_, _Jul, Ps_: (intr.)
_to rail, utter taunts_, _W_. [‘_heascen_’]

  [[Spelled “hȳscan” in 3 of 5 cross-references, and in compound
  onhȳscan; first edition also has “hȳscan”.]]

hȳscend (ī) m. _reviler_, GPH 398.

hyscild (WW 170^12) = hysecild

hyse † nap. hyssas m. _son, youth, young man, warrior_.

hysebeorðor n. _the bearing of male offspring_: _boy, young man_.

hyse-berðling, -byrding m. _the bearing of male offspring_.

hyseberðre f. _woman who bears a son_, SHy 50^17. [byrðere]

hysecild n. _male child_, Æ, AO.

hyserinc m. _young man_, GD 338^22.

hysewīse adv. _after the manner of young men_, WW 417^35.

hysope = ysope

hyspan (e, i) pret. hyspde and hyspte _to mock, scorn, deride, revile_,
AO. [hosp]

hyspend m. _calumniator_, #RPs# 71^4.

+hyspendlic _abominable_, #LPs# 13^1.

hyspful _ridiculous_, OEG 11^180.

hysp-nes, -ung f. _contumely_.

hysse = hyse

hyt I. f. _heat_, B 2649. [_ON._ hita; or ? read hāt] II. = hit pron.

hȳt pres. 3 sg. of hȳdan.

hyttan = hittan

hȳð I. f. _landing-place, harbour, creek, port_, _Cp, Guth, Met, Ps_; Æ,
CP. [‘_hithe_’] II. f. _booty, prey_.

+hȳð _appropriate, convenient_, Æ.

hȳðan (ī) _plunder, ravage_. [hūð]

±hȳðegian _to facilitate_.

hȳðegung f. _advantage_, #Sc# 12^6.

±hȳðelic _suitable, proper, convenient, advantageous_. adv. -līce.

+hȳðelicnes f. ‘_opportunitas_,’ NC 345.

hȳðgild n. _harbour offering, sacrifice or service_, OEG.

hȳðlic _belonging to a harbour_, WW.

+hȳðlic = +hȳðelic

+hȳðnes f. _advantage_, ÆL 23b^252: _occasion_, #EPs# 9^27.

hȳðscip (ī) n. _a light, piratical vessel_, #Gl#.

hȳðð f. _gain, advantage_.

+hyððo n. _subsistence_, ÆL 23b^492.

hȳðweard m. _warden of a harbour_, B 1915.

hȳw == hīw

+hȳwan = +īewan

hȳxan = hȳscan  [[headword spelled “hyscan”]]




=I=


īa (Æ) = gēa

īacessūre = gēacessūre

īacinctus, īacintus m. _jacinth_, CP. [_L._ hyacinthus]

īagul = gēagl

iara = gearo

iarwan = gierwan

īb- = īf-

ic pron. (1st pers.) ‘_I_,’ _Cp, Jn_. [_Ger._ ich]

īcan, icean = īecan

īce = ȳce

īcend m. ‘_auctor_,’ #ÆGr# 48^12. [īecan]

īcestre f. ‘_auctrix_,’ #ÆGr# 48^12.

icge only in phr. ‘icge gold,’ _treasure-gold_? _rich gold_? B 1108.

īdæges adv. _on the same day_, Æ.

īdel I. (often īdl- in obl. cases) _worthless, useless, vain_, _Æ, Cp,
Gen, Mt, VPs_: _empty, desolate, bare, void, destitute, devoid (of)_,
_Æ, B, VPs_; CP: _‘idle,’ unemployed_, _Mt_. on ī. adv. _in vain_, _Æ_.
II. n. _emptiness, frivolity, idleness_, _Lcd, LL, Sol_ (ȳ):
_inattention, carelessness_.

īdelgeorn _slothful, idle_.

īdelgielp (e^3, i^3) n. _empty boasting, vainglory_, CP, DHy, WW.

īdelgild n. _vain worship, idolatry_, Æ.

īdelgildoffrung f. _offering to an idol_, Æ.

īdelhende _empty-handed, empty_, Æ, CP.

īdelinga (a^2) ‘_frivola_,’ GPH 389.

īdellic _vain, idle_. adv. -līce, _VPs_. [‘_idly_’]

īdelnes f. _frivolity, vanity, emptiness, falseness_, _VPs_; CP. in (on)
īdelnisse _in vain_: _‘idleness,’ idle, vain existence_, _LL_.

-īdelsprǣce v. fela-ī.

ides _virgin_: (†) _woman, wife, lady, queen_.

idig _busy_? _active_? (BT); _greedy for_? _desirous of_? (GK), #Ph#
407?

īdl- v. īdel.

±īdlian _to become useless_.

īdol n. _idol_, LL. [_L._]

īe v. ēa.

īecan (ǣ, ē, ēa, ī, ȳ) pret. īecte, īhte _to increase, enlarge, add to,
augment, prolong_, _An, Lcd, Lk_ (ī): (+) _fulfil, carry out_, RSL
11·486. [‘_eche_’; ēac]

īecinctus = īacinctus

īecsesūre = gēacessūre

īedel- = īdel-

īeg (īg) f. _island_. [ēa]

īegbūend m. _islander_, CP.

īegclif (ēg-) n. _sea-cliff_, B 2893.

īegland (ē, ī) n. _island_.

īegstrēam (ē^1) † m. _current, river, sea_.

īehtan = ēhtan

ielc- = ilc-

ield = ieldo

±ieldan (i, y) _to delay, put off, prolong, hesitate, tarry_, _CP_:
_connive at, dissimulate_. [‘_eld_’; eald]

ieldcian (CP) = elcian

ielde † (e, ea, i, y) mp. _men_.

ielden (æ) n. _delay_, BH 400^20.

ieldend (y) m. _one who delays_.

ieldendlic (e) _dilatory_, WW 441^2.

ieldest (æ, e, y) superl. of eald (_Æ, Mt, CP_; ‘_eldest_’).

ieldesta m. _chief_.

ieldful (i, y) _dilatory, delaying_, OEG.

ieldian (y) _to put off, delay_, Æ.

ielding f. _delay, tarrying_, CP: _dissimulation_.

ieldo (æ, e, i, y) f. _age_, _Æ, Gu, Lcd_: _period_: _old age, old
people_, _Æ, Bl_; CP: _an age of the world_, _Æ, Gu_. [‘_eld_’; eald]

ieldra (y) (comp. of eald) used as sbpl. _parents, ancestors_, _B, Bo,
El, Rd_. [‘_elder_’]

ieldrafæder (æld-) m. _grandfather_, WW 7^34.

ieldu = ieldo

ielfe (y) mp. _elves_ (v. ælf).

ielfen (æ, e, y) f. _elf, fairy_.

ielfig (y) _raving, frantic, mad_, WW. [v. ‘_giddy_’]

iēmung (WW 277^22) = gēmung

ierd = gierd

ierf- v. also yrf-.

ierfe (æ, e, i, y) n. _heritage, bequest, property_, CP: _cattle_.
[_Ger._ erbe]

ierfian (i) _to inherit, possess_: (+) _to stock with cattle_.

iergan _to dishearten_. [earg]

iergðu f. _remissness, sloth, cowardice_, AO. [earg]

ierlic (i) _angry, vehement_, #ApT#.

±ierman _to harass, vex, afflict_, CP. [earm]

ierming (eo, e, y) m. _person of no account, poor wretch_, AO, CP.

iermð, iermðu (e, ea, eo, y) f. _misery, distress, poverty_, _B, Bo,
Ps_: _disease_: _crime_: _reproach, calumny_, #CPs# 118^134. [‘_ermth_’;
earm]

iernan^3 (æ, i, y; rinnan) pret. 3 sg. arn, orn, pl. urnon; pp. urnen
(±) _to run, move rapidly, hasten, flow, spread_, _Æ, AO, CP, Lcd, VPs_:
_pursue_, _Bo, Ps_: _cause to move rapidly, turn, grind_, _AO, BH_: (+)
_get to, attain, meet with_: (+) _occur (to one’s mind)_, GD: (+)
_coagulate_, _Lcd_: (+) _grow up_. [‘_ern_’]

ierning (e) f. _discharge, flow_, NG.

ierre I. (i, y) _wandering, erring, perverse, depraved_, _Ps, Sol_:
_angry, fierce_, _Æ, Bl, Chr, CP_; AO. II. n. _anger_, _Bl, CP, El, Lk_.
[‘_irre_’]

ierremōd (y) _wrathful, wild_, B 726.

ierrenga (eo^1, y^1, i^2, u^2) adv. _angrily, fiercely_, CP.

ierreðweorh (y) _very angry_, #Sat# 399?

ierscipe (y) m. _anger_, #LPs# 9^25.

±iersian (i, io, y) _to be angry with, rage_: _enrage, irritate_, CP.

iersigendlic _passionate, emotional_, Æ (y).

iersung (i, y) f. _anger_, CP.

iersunga adv. _angrily_.

ierð- = eorð-, yrð-

iesca (Ep, Erf) = geocsa

iesend, iesende _entrails_, WW. [= gesen]

ieteð pres. 3 sg. of etan.

īeð adv. comp. (= ēað) _easily_, _An, Met_; AO, CP. [‘_eath_’]

+īeðan (ē) _to alleviate_, #Gu# 1179: _compassionate_, GD 216 (ȳ).

īeðe I. _easy, good-natured, pleasant_, _B_; AO. II. (†) = ēðe

īeðegean = ȳðgian

īeðelic _easy_, CP: adv. -līce _easily_, AO, CP.

īeðnes f. _ease, pleasure_, CP 425^11.

±īewan (ēa, ēo, ȳ) _to show, display, reveal, disclose, point out_, CP.
[ēage; cp. ēowan]

īfegn = īfig

īfig n. ‘_ivy_,’ _Gl, Lcd, Shr_.

īfigbearo _ivy-grove_, CC 50.

īfig-crop, -croppa m. _cluster of ivy berries_.

īfiglēaf n. _ivy leaf_, #Lcd# 117b.

īfig-tearo, -tara n. _ivy tar, resin from tar_, #Lcd#.

īfiht _ivy-covered_, KC.

ig = ic

īg = īeg

īgbūend = īegbūend

igdæges = īdæges

igel = īl

igg = īeg

iggað, iggoð, īg(e)oð m. _‘ait,’ eyot, small island_, _Æ, Chr_.

igil, igl (Æ) = īl

īgland (ē) n. ‘_island_,’ _BH, Bo, Chr, Whale_.

īgoð, īgð = iggað

ih = ic

īhte pret. 3 sg. of īecan.

īl (igil) m. _hedgehog, porcupine_, _Shr, WW_; CP. [‘_il_’]

īland = īgland

ilca (y) pron. (always wk) _the same_, _An, Bo, Chr, OET_; CP. [‘_ilk_’]

ilce adv. v. swā.

ild- = ield-

ile (y) m. _sole of the foot_, Æ: _callosity, corn_, Æ. [cp. _Ger._
eilen]

ilfetu, ilfe(t)te (y) f. _swan_, #Gl#; Mdf.

illca = ilca

illeracu f. _surfeit_, WW 378^15.

+illerocad _surfeited_, #CVPs# 77^65.

ilnetu (WW 367^27) = ilfetu

ilugsecg v. eolhsecg.

imbe = ymbe II.

imberdling, imbyrdling = inbyrdling

impa? m., impe? f. _graft, shoot, scion_, CP 381^17. [‘_imp_’]

impian _to ‘imp,’ implant, graft_, _LL_ 454[12]: (+) _busy oneself
with_, CP 132^25.

in I. prep. with a. and d. (instr.) (local) _‘in,’ into, upon, on, at,
to, among_: (temporal) _in, at, about, towards, during_: (purpose) _in,
to, for_. II. sb. and adv. = inn

in- (v. BH xxxiii ff.) = on-

ināberan^4 (inn-) _to bring in_, Æ.

inādl f. _internal disease_, #Lcd#.

inǣlan (#VPs#) = onǣlan

ināgān = ingān

ināgēode = inēode pret. 3 sg. of ingān.

ināsendan _to send in_.

ināwritting f. _inscription_, LkL 20^24.

inbærnednes (#CPs# 66); inbærnes (#Gl#) f. _burning, incense,
frankincense_. [= onb-]

inbecweðan^5 _to inculcate_, WW 429^36.

inbelǣdan _to lead in_.

inbelūcan^2 _to shut_, #Bl# 217^26.

inbend mf. _internal bond_, #Gu# 928.

inber- = on-, in-byr-

inberan _to carry in_, LL 386[1].

inbernes (#VPs#) = inbærnes  [[under “inbærnednes”]]

inbeslēan _to hack into (any one)_, LL 86[74].

inbestingan^3 _to penetrate_, LL 7[64,2].

inbetȳnednes f. _life of a recluse_, GD 212^5.

inbewindan^3 _to enfold, enwrap_.

inbirdling = inbyrdling

inblāwan^7 _to inspire, breathe upon_, _JnR_: _inflate, puff up_, _EC_.
[‘_inblow_’]

inboden _proclaimed_. [onbēodan]

inbolgen _exasperated_. [= onb-]

inboren ptc. _indigenous, native_, GPH 390. [‘_inborn_’]

inborh m. _bail, security in cases of theft_, _LL_. [‘_inborgh_’]

inbrēdan^3 _to burst in upon_, GPH 393.

in-brengan, -bringan _to bring in, present_, _Mk_. [‘_inbring_’]

inbryne (byr) m. _conflagration_.

inbryrd- = onbryrd-

inbūan _to inhabit_, MtL 23^21.

inbūend m. _inhabitant_, WW 210^13.

in-burg, -burh f. _hall_, WW.

inbyrde _born on the estate_, Ct.

inbyrdling (e) m. _slave born in a master’s house_, Æ.

inbyrne (DR) = inbryne

inbyrð pres. 3 sg. of inberan.

inc (_Mt, Mk_) da. of git, dual pers. pron. [‘_inc_’]

inca m. _question, scruple, suspicion, doubt_: _grievance, quarrel,
grudge_, BH. incan witan _to have a grudge_.

incaðēode = ingeðēode  [[form of “ingeðēod”]]

ince = ynce

incēgan _to call upon_, DR 119^3. [cīgan]

incēgung f. _invocation_, DR.

incempa m. _soldier of the same company_, WW 207^6.

incer (y) I. gen. of git, dual pers. pron. II. adj. pron. _of or
belonging to both of you_, _Mt_. [‘_inker_’]

+incfullian _to offend, scandalize_, MtR. [inca]

incga = inca

incit acc. of git, dual personal pronoun.

incleofa (i, y) m. _chamber, closet_: _cave, den_.

incniht m. _household servant_, Æ.

incofa m. _inner chamber_, ÆL: _breast, heart_, #Met# 22^18.

incoðu f. _internal disease_, Æ.

incuman^4 _to come in, go into, enter_, _Æ_. [‘_income_’]

incund _interior, internal, inward, secret_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce, Æ.

incundnes f. _inward conviction, sincerity_, W 105^30: _inward part,
recess_, DHy.

incūð _strange, extraordinary_. adv. -līce.

incyme m. _entrance_, LV 32.

indǣlan _to infuse_, DR.

indēpan _to dip in_, LkL 16^24.

Indisc _Indian_, Æ.

indrencan = ondrencan

indrīfan^1 _to ejaculate, utter_, #Sat# 80.

indrihten = indryhten

indrincan^3 _to imbibe, drink_. indruncen _plied with drink_.

indryhten _distinguished, noble, excellent_.

indryhto † f. _honour, glory_.

ineardian _to dwell in, inhabit_, #VPs#.

inēddisc n. _household stuff, furniture_, WW 147^32. [ȳddisc]

inelfe = innelfe

inerfe = innierfe

infær n. _ingress, entrance, entry_, _Æ, WW_. [‘_infare_’]

infæreld n. _in-coming, entrance_, Æ: _interior_: _vestibule_.

infangene-ðēof, infangen-ðēf sb. _right of judging thieves caught within
the limits of one’s jurisdiction, and of taking the fines for the
crime_, _Ct_; v. LL 2·523. [‘_infangthief_’]

infaran^6 I. _to enter_, _Æ, Jn_. [‘_infare_’] II. = innefaran

infaru f. _incursion, inroad_, #Chr# 1048.

infeallan^7 _to fall in_, #VPs#.

infeccan _to fetch in_, #Bl# 175^1.

infēran _to enter in_, Æ.

infiht n. _brawl in a house_, LL 597´.

infindan^3 _to find, discover_, NG.

inflēde † _full of water_.

inflēon^2 _to fly from_, #Rim# 44.

infōster n. _bringing up, rearing_, LL 396´.

infrōd † _very aged, experienced_.

ing I. _name of the rune for =ng=_. II. = ging, geong

-ing suffix, as in earming, lytling (originally patronymic).

in-gān anv. pret. -ēode _to go in, enter_, _BH, Mt_. [‘_ingo_’]

ingang m. _ingress, entrance, access, beginning_, _BH, Ps_ (inn-):
_entrance fee_. [‘_ingang_’]

ingangan^7 _to go in, enter_, Æ.

ingebed n. _earnest prayer_, #PPs# 87^2.

ingeberigan (NG) = onbyrgan

ingebringan^3 _to bring in_, LL 150´.

inge-cīgan, -cēgan ‘_invocare_,’ #VPs#; #CPs# 90^15.

ingedōn anv. _to put in_, BH 434^20.

ingedrincan (GPH 391) = indrincan

ingefeallan^7 ‘_incidere_,’ #Ps#.

ingefeoht n. _internal war_, BH.

ingefolc n. _native race_, #Ex# 142.

ingehrif (-gerif) n. _womb_, #LPs# 21^8.

inge-hygd, -hȳd (Æ), -hīd f. _consciousness, mind, conscience, sense,
understanding_: _intention, purpose, design_.

ingehygdnes f. _intention_, #LPs# 48^5.

ingelǣdan = inlǣdan

ingelaðian _to invite_.

ingemang v. gemang prep.

ingemynd † fn. _recollection, memory, mind_.

ingemynde _well-remembered_, #El# 896.

ingenga m. _visitor, intruder_, B 1776.

ingeongan (NG) = ingangan

ingēotan^2 _to pour in, fill_.

ingēoting (yn- ?= ymb-) f. _inpouring_, OEG.

ingerec n. _broil_, BH. [= ungerec]

ingerif = ingehrif

ingeseted _placed in, inserted_.

ingesteald _household goods_, B 1155.

ingeswel n. _internal swelling_, WW 113^5.

ingeðanc mn. _thought, mind, conscience, intention_, Æ, CP.

ingeðēod † f. _nation_.

ingeweaxen _implanted_, WW 427^8.

ingewinn n. _civil war_, AO 88^29.

ingewitnes f. _consciousness, conscience_, BH.

ingong (CP) = ingang

ingyte m. _pouring in, infusion, inspiration_, CM 424. [gēotan]

inhǣtan _to inflame_, GD 29^9.

inhebban (#Cr# 313) = onhebban

inheldan = onhieldan

inheord f. _herd kept by the lord on his lands_, LL 449[7].

inhīred m. _family, household_, Æ.

in-hīwan, -hīgan sbpl. _members of a household or community, servants_.

inhold _loyal in heart_, #Lcd# 3·442^28.

inhȳrnes f. _possession_, EC 364´.

inilfe = innelfe

ininnan = oninnan

inlād f. _right of water-passage inland_: _entrance-fee_.

inlǣdan _‘inducere,’ to introduce_, NG.

inlænd- = inlend-

±inlagian _to reverse sentence of outlawry_, _Chr, LL_. [‘_inlaw_’]

inland n. _land in the lord’s own occupation, domain, demesne_.

inlaðian _to invite_.

inlaðigend m. _inviter_, #Sc# 170^12.

inlec = inlic

inlēgan (#VPs#) = onlīegan  [[error for “onlicgan”?]]

inlēhtan = inlīhtan

inlenda m. _native_, #Gl#.

in-lende, -lendisc _native, indigenous_.

inlēohtan = inlīhtan

inlic _internal, interior, inward_, _BH_: _native_. adv. -līce
_inwardly_: _thoroughly, sincerely, heartily_, _BH, Bo_. [‘_inly_’]

inlīchomung f. _incarnation_, DR.

±inlīhtan (= on-) _to shine, illuminate, enlighten_.

inlīhtend m. _illuminator_, DR 2^6.

inlīhtian (= on-) _to illuminate, enlighten_, NG.

inlīhtnes f. _illumination_, #VPs#.

inliðewāc = unliðuwāc  [[headword spelled “unliðowāc”]]

inlīxan _to become light, dawn_, LkL 23^54.

inlocast superl. adv. _innermost, most heartily_. [inlīce]

inlȳhtan = inlīhtan

inmearg n. _marrow_, GPH 397.

inmēde _close to one’s heart, important in one’s estimation_, RB;
#Bk# 15.

inn I. n. _dwelling, apartment, lodging, chamber, house_, _Æ, Mt_; AO:
_quartering oneself (of soldiers)_. [‘_inn_’] II. adv. _in, inwards,
within, inside of_: _into_. inn on _into_.

inn- = in-

inna (LkL) = innoð

innan I. prep. (w. a. g. d.) _from within_, _B_: _within, in, into_, _G,
Gen, Lcd_; CP. II. adv. _within, inside, in_, _AO_. [‘_inne_’]

innanbordes adv. _(within borders), at home_, CP.

innanburhware sbpl. _residents within the walls of a town_, TC 510^31.

innancund _inner, inward, internal_: _thorough, hearty_.

innane = innan II.

innanweard = inweard

innað = innoð

innāwritting (_LkL_) = onwrīting

inne adv. _in, inside, within, in-doors_, _A, AO, BH, Chr, Ct, Lcd_.

inne- = inn-, in-

innecund adj. _inward_, CP 139.

inne-faran, -foran _bowels_, #Lcd#.

innelfe n. _bowels_: _womb_.

innemest (superl. of inne) adj. ‘_inmost_,’ _Sc_: _most intimate, deep
or close_, _CP_. adv. _inmost_.

innera (compar. of inne) _‘inner,’ interior_, _WW_: _mental, spiritual_,
_BH, LL, Sc_.

inneð = innoð

inne-weard, -werd = inweard

innheardmann m. _one of the household troops_, MtL 8^9. [inhīred]

innhere m. _home force, native army_, #Chr# 1006#e#.

innian _to go in_, _Bo_: (±) _put up, lodge_, _Chr_ 1048: (+) _include_:
(+) _fill, restore, make good_, Æ. [‘_inn_’]

innierfe (e^2) n. _household stuff, furniture, goods_, #Bo# 31^19.

innifli (Cp 115#i#) = innelfe

inniht (WW 450^21) = incniht?

innīwian _to renew_, DR 168^12.

innon = innan

innor (_ÆGr_) compar. of inne. [‘_inner_’]

innoð mf. _inside, entrails, stomach, womb, breast, heart_, _BH, Bo, G_;
Æ, CP.

innoðmægen (e^3) n. _strength_, EHy 5^16.

innoðtȳdernes f. _weakness of the bowels_, #Lcd# 105a.

innoðwund f. _internal wound_, #Lcd# 88b.

innra = innera

innung f. _dwelling_: _contents, takings, revenue_, _Bo, KC_.
[‘_inning_’]

innweardlīce = inweardlīce

innweorud n. _retainers, household_, #Wid# 111.

innylfe = innelfe

inorf n. _household goods, furniture_.

inra (Æ) = innera

inræcan ‘_ingesserunt_,’ WW 420^18 (v. A 31·532).

inrǣsan _to rush upon_.

inrēcels n. _incense_, LkR 1^9.

insæglung = inseglung

insǣte adj. _dependent_, WW 185^9.

insætnes = insetnes

inscēawere m. _inspector_, DR 194.

inscēawung f. _inspection, view_, NG.

insceðende = unsceððende  [[redirected to “unscæððende”]]

in-segel, -segl (æ) n. _seal, signet_, _Æ, Ct_. [‘_inseil_’; _L._]

±inseglian (æ) _to seal_, _LL_; ÆL. [‘_inseil_’]

inseglung f. _sealing, seal_, Æ (æ).

insendan _to send in, put in_, #VPs#.

insetnes f. _regulation_, DR.

insettan _to institute_, BH, JnL.

insigle n. _seal, signet_. [insegel]

insiht f. _narrative_, JnL.

insittende _sitting within_, #Rd# 47^7.

insmoh m. _slough_, MH 162^11.

insōcn f. _brawl in a house_, LL 597[80,12].

insomnian _to gather in_, BH 274^1.

inspinn n. _spindle_, WW.

instæpe I. m. _entrance_, ÆH 1·84. II. = instæpes

instæpes adv. _forthwith, directly_.

instæppan (Æ) = insteppan

instandan^6 (o^2) _to be present_, DR.

instandendlic (o^2) _required for present use_, MtR 6^11.

instede (y) _immediately_, NG.

in-stepe, -stepes = instæpes

insteppan^6 (æ) _to go in, enter_, Æ.

instice m. _internal stitching pain_, #Lcd#.

instīgan^1 _to climb in_, GD 24.

instihtian _to appoint, arrange_, LkL p2^6.

insting = onsting

instyde = instede

inswān m. _lord’s swineherd_, LL 447.

inswōgan^7 _to invade_, BH 278^8.

inswōgennes f. _onrush_, BH 110^33.

intiga (#KGl#) = intinga

intimb- = ontimb-

intinga m. _matter, business_, Æ: _cause_: _fault_. butan intingan _in
vain, emptily_.

intō prep. with d. (instr.), a. _into, to, against, in_, Æ.

intrahtnung f. _interpretation_, MtL p2^7.

inðer adv. _apart_, MtR 17^1.

inðicce _crass, thick_, MtL 13^15.

inðīnen f. _female servant_, GPH 401.

inðing (N) = intinga

inðwēan = onðwēan

in-wærc, -wræc m. _internal pain_.

inwǣte f. _internal humour_, #Lcd# 97a.

inweard I. (innan-, inne-) adj. _internal, inward, inner, intrinsic,
deep, sincere, earnest_, _Æ, B, Bo, Cr_. as sbn. _inward parts_, _Æ,
WW_. II. adv. _within_: _mentally, spiritually_, _LkL_. [‘_inward_’]

inweardlic (e) _internal_, _Lcd_: _sincere_, W. adv. -līce ‘_inwardly_,’
Æ: _deeply, thoroughly, heartily, sincerely_, _Æ, Met_.

inwendan _to change_, #VPs#.

inweorc n. _indoor work_, LL 454[11].

inwerd- = inweard-

inwid == inwit

inwidda m. _adversary, enemy_.

inwise f. _condiment_, #Lcd# 69a.

inwit I. n. _evil, deceit, guile_. II. adj. _wicked, malign, deceitful_.

inwitfeng m. _spiteful clutch_, B 1447.

inwitflān m. _treacherous shaft_, #Mod# 37.

inwitful _wicked, crafty_.

inwitgæst m. _evil guest_, B 2670.

inwitgecynd n. _evil nature_, #Sol# 329.

inwitgyren f. _treacherous snare_, #PPs# 139^5.

inwithlemm ‡ (id) m. _treacherous wound_.

inwithrōf m. _unfriendly roof_, B 3123.

inwitnet n. _net of malice_, B 2167.

inwitnīð † m. _cunning hostility_.

inwitrūn † f. _evil, crafty counsel_.

inwitscear m. _murderous attack_, B 2478.

inwitsearo n. _artful intrigue_, B 1101.

inwitsorh † f. _sorrow_.

inwitspell n. _tale of woe_, #Gen# 2024.

inwitstæf † m. _wickedness, evil_.

inwitðanc † m. _malicious thought, hostile intent_.

inwitwrāsn † f. _hostile fetter_.

inwræc = inwærc

inwrītere m. _writer, secretary_, ZDA 31·23.

inwritting f. _inscription_.

inwund f. _internal wound_, #Lcd# 70a.

inwunenes f. _persistence_, WW 426^5.

inwunung f. _residence in_, NC 304.

io- = geo-

īo (= īu) == gēo

ioc == geoc

iom = eom

ionna (N) adv. _within_.

ionnað = innoð

īor † m. _name of a river-fish (eel?_): _name of the rune for =io=_.

iorning = ærning

iornð = iernð pres. 3 sg. of iernan.

iorsian (#KGl#) = iersian

Īotas mpl. _the Jutes_.

īow m. = īw

īowan = īewan

ippingīren = yppingīren

īren == īsen

irfe = ierfe

irgian = eargian

Iringes weg m. _milky way_, WW 53^23.

irm- = ierm-; iern-

irn- = iern-, eorn-

irre == ierre

irs- = iers-

irsenhelm = īsenhelm

irðling = yrðling

is pres. 3 sg. of eom, anv.

īs n. ‘_ice_,’ _BH, Met, PPs_: (pl.) _pieces of ice_, _BH_: _name of the
rune for =i=_.

īsærn (#Gl#) = īsearn

īsceald † _icy cold_, _Met, Seaf_. [‘_icecold_’]

ise (N) = gise  [[headword spelled “gīse”]]

īsearn (æ, e) m. _halcyon, kingfisher_.

īsen I. (īsern, īren) n. ‘_iron_,’ _Æ, BH, CP, Gl, LL_: _iron
instrument_, _Lcd_: _fetter_, _Ps_: (†) _iron weapon, sword_, _B_:
_ordeal of red-hot iron_, LL 230[6]. [_Ger._ eisen] II. adj. _of iron,
‘iron,’_ _Æ, B, Bl, CP, Da_.

īsenbend † (īr-) mf. _iron bond, fetter_.

īsenbyrne (īsern-) f. _iron corslet_, B 671.

isend = iesend

īsenesmið = īsensmið

īsenfetor (īsern-) f. _iron fetter_, #Gl#.

īsengelōma (īr-) m. _iron instrument_, #Nar# 9^19.

īsengræf m. _iron-mine_? KC 5·234^28.

īsengrǣg (grēi) ‘_iron-grey_,’ _WW_.

īsenheard (īr-) _hard as iron_, B 112. [‘_iron-hard_’]

īsenhearde f. _(‘iron-hard’), black centaury, vervain, knapweed_, _Lcd_.

īsenhelm (irsen-) m. _iron helmet_, WW 142^2.

īsenhere (-ern) m. _iron-clad army_, #Ex# 348.

īsenhyrst adj. _with iron fittings_, KC.

īsenordāl (ȳ) n. _ordeal by iron_, LL.

īsenōre f. _iron mine_, #Gl#.

īsen-panna m., -panne f. _frying pan_, #Gl#.

īsenscofl f. _iron shovel_, #Gl# (īsernscobl).

īsenscūr f. _shower of arrows_, B 3116 (-ern).

īsensmið m. _blacksmith_.

īsenswāt m. _dross of iron_? #Lcd#.

īsentang f. _snuffers_, WW 327^14.

īsenðrēat m. _iron clad troop_, B 330 (īr-).

īsenwyrhta m. _blacksmith_, WW 310^33.

isern = iesende  [[under “iesend”]]

īsern (1) == īsen; (2) = īsearn

īsgebind n. _fetters of ice_, B 1113.

īsgeblǣd (ȳ) n. _ice-blister, chilblain_? #Lcd#.

īsig ‘_icy_,’ _Met_: _shining_? _glistening_? _covered with ice_? B 33.

īsigfeðera _with frosted wings_, #Seaf# 24.

īsiht _icy_, ÆL 23b^572.

īsīðes adv. _immediately_, LL (338^11).

īsmere m. _icy lake_, #Met# 28^62.

±īsnian _to cover with iron_. pp. īsnod _iron-clad_, WW 236^19.

itest, itst pres. 2 sg., iteð, itt pres. 3 sg. of etan.

īð == īeð

īðan (ǣ, ē, ȳ) _to lay waste, ravage, devastate, desolate, destroy_, Æ.

iu- = geo-

iū = gēo

iuc == geoc

Iūdēas sbmp. _the Jews_, G.

Iūdēisc _Jewish_, G.

iugian = geocian

īuih (NG) = ēowic, ēow

īuwian (AS 7^19) = īewan

īw (ēow) m. _‘yew,’ yew-tree_, Æ; Mdf.

īwberge (ēow) f. _yew-berry_, #Lcd#.




=K=


Words beginning with =k= will be found under =c=.




=L=


lā interj. _lo! behold! oh! ah!_ Æ. lā lēof _O Lord! O sir!_: _indeed,
verily_, Æ. hwæt lā _what!_ wā lā wā! _alas!_

label = (*lafel), læfel

laber (_Lcd_) = lǣfer

lāc nf. _play, sport_: (†) _strife, battle_: _sacrifice, offering_, Æ,
CP: _gift, present_, _Mt_; Æ: _booty_, _B_: (†) _message_. [‘_lake_’]

+lac † n. _tumult, commotion_. sweorda +l. _battle_: _crowd, host_, #Cr#
896.

lācan^7 pret. 3 sg. leolc _to move up and down, leap, jump, swing, fly_,
_Jul_: _play (instrument)_: (†) _fight, contend_, _B_: (+) _incite to_,
AO: _be rewarded_. [‘_lake_’]

lācdǣd f. _munificence_, OEG 3833.

lācgeofa m. _generous giver_, #PPs# 67^18.

+lācian _to present, bestow_.

lāclic _sacrificial_, LL (380^18).

±lācnian (ǣ, ē) _to heal, cure, treat, look after_, _Æ, BH, LkL_; AO,
CP: _foment, dress (a wound)_. [‘_lechne_’]

lācnigendlic _surgical_, #HGl# 478.

lācnimende only in bēon l. ‘_munerari_,’ BHy 3^19.

lācnung f. _healing, cure_: _medicament, remedy_.

lācsang m. _offertory hymn_, WW 130^2.

lactuc, lactu-ce, m. -ca f. _lettuce_, Æ. [_L._]

lacu f. _running water, stream, pool, ‘lake,’_ _Chr_ 656#e#.

lād I. f. _course, journey_, _An, B_: (±) _way, street, water-way_:
_leading, carrying_, _LL_: _maintenance, support_. [‘_load_,’ ‘_lode_’]
II. f. _clearing from blame or accusation, purgation, exculpation_, CP.

ladan (NG) = hladan

±lādian _to clear oneself from blame or accusation, exculpate oneself_:
_let off, excuse_, Æ, AO, CP.

lādiendlic _excusable_, WW 233^31.

lādmann m. _conductor, guide_, _Æ_. [‘_lodeman_’]

lād-rinc? -rincman m. _conductor, escort_, LL 3[7] (v. 2·441).

ladsar = laser  [[headword spelled “lāser”]]

lādscipe m. _leadership_, WW 481^6.

lādtēow, lādðēow == lāttēow

lādung f. _exculpation, excuse, defence, apology_, Æ, CP.

lǣc = (1) lēac; (2) lāc

lǣca = lǣce

-lǣca v. āg-, ellen-l. etc.

+lǣca _emulous_, GPH 391.

lǣcan _to spring up, rise, flare up_, #Sat# 716.

+lǣcan _to emulate_, GPH 391: _join with, make common cause with_? #CPs#
140^4. [lāc]

±læccan _to seize, grasp, comprehend_, _Æ_: _capture, catch_, _Chr, G,
LL_: _receive_, ÆL. [‘_latch_,’ ‘_i-lecche_’]

lǣce (ē, ȳ) m. _physician, doctor_, _BH, LkL_; Æ, CP: ‘_leech_,’
_WW_; Æ.

lǣcebōc f. _book of prescriptions_, #Lcd#.

lǣcecræft m. _‘leech-craft,’ art of healing_, _Bo, Lcd_; Æ: _medicament,
remedy, prescription_, Æ.

lǣcecræftig _skilled in medicine_, #Lcd# 186b.

lǣcecynn n. _race of physicians_, #Rd# 6^10.

lǣcecyst f. _medicine chest_, GD 344^17.

lǣcedōm m. _medicament, medicine_, _BH, WW_ (e); Æ, CP: _salvation_.
[‘_leechdom_’]

lǣcedōmlic _salutary_, A 5·458.

lǣcedōmnes f. _cataplasm_, WW.

lǣcefeoh n. _doctor’s fee_, LL (148^19).

lǣcefinger m. _(‘leech-finger’), fourth finger_, _Lcd_.

lǣcegeatwa? (-getea) fp. _medical apparatus_, v. NC 304.

lǣcehūs n. _sick room, hospital_.

lǣceiren n. _surgeon’s knife, lancet_, GD 32.

lǣcesealf f. _medicinal ointment_, WW 514^21.

lǣceseax n. _lancet_, CP 187^9.

lǣcewyrt f. _medicinal herb, drug_, Æ: _ribwort_.

lǣcnian = lācnian

lǣdan (±) _to ‘lead,’ guide, conduct, carry, lift, take, bring_, _Æ, BH,
Bl, Chr, VPs_; CP. wīf l. _take a wife, marry_: (±) _produce, bring
forth_: _pass, lead (life)_, _BH, Met_: _to mark or beat the bounds of
land_, EC 155: _perform, do_, _An_: _place, lay_, Æ: _sprout forth,
grow, spread_.

lǣde (BH 400^2) = lǣwede

lǣden I. (ē, ēo) n. ‘_Latin_,’ _A, BH, CP_: _any foreign language_,
_Lcd_ (‘_leden_’). II. adj. _Latin_.

lǣdenboc (e) f. _Latin book_, Æ.

lǣdend I. m. _bringer_. II. m. _excuser, apologist_. [*lǣdan]

lǣdengereord n. _Latin language_, #Lcd#.

lǣdengeðēode n. _Latin language_, CP.

lǣden-isc, -lic _Latin_.

lǣdenlār f. _knowledge of Latin_, W 124^12.

+lǣdenlic ‘_ductilis_,’ #EPs# 97^6.

lǣdennama m. _Latin noun_, #ÆGr# 292^18.

lǣdensprǣc (ē) f. _Latin language_, Æ, CP.

lǣdenstæfum (ē) adv. _in Latin_, Jn 19^20.

lǣdenware mpl. _Latin people, Romans_, CP.

lǣdenword (ē) n. _Latin word_, #ÆGr# 122^6.

lǣdnes f. _bringing forth_, BH.

lǣdtēow = lāttēow

lǣf = (1) lāf; (2) lēaf

±lǣfan (ē) I. _to ‘leave,’ bequeath_, _B, Jn_; Æ, CP: _spare, leave
behind, have left_, _Lk, Mk_: _remain_, _Æ_. [lāf] II. = līefan

læfel (e) m. _spoon, basin, vessel, bowl, cup_. [_Ger._ löffel; _L._
labellum]

lǣfend (WW 168^17) = lǣwend

lǣfer f. _rush, reed, iris, gladiolus_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ: _metal plate_, Æ.
[‘_laver_’; ‘_levers_’]

lǣferbed n. _reed-bed_, WW 138^29.

lǣfnes = lēafnes

læg pret. 3 sg. of licgan.

lǣg = (1) lēag; (2) līeg

lægde = legde pret. sg. of lecgan.

lǣgon pret. pl. of licgan.

lǣgt = līget

læht pp., læhte pret. sg. of læccan.

lǣl (ē) f., lǣla m. _rod, whip, switch_: _bruise, weal, stripe_, #Ex#.

lǣlan, lǣlian _to become black and blue, be bruised_.

lǣmen (ē) _of clay, earthen_, Æ. [lām]

lǣmian = lēmian  [[headword spelled “lemian”]]

lǣn (ā) I. nf. _loan, borrowing, lease, grant, gift, present, benefit_,
Æ, CP. [lēon] II. = lǣnland

±lǣnan (ē) _to ‘lend,’_ _WW_; CP: _give, grant, lease_, _Gen_, Æ.

lǣndagas † mpl. _loan-days, transitory days, days of a man’s life_.

lænde-, lænden- = lenden-

lǣne (ē) _lent, temporary, inconstant, transitory_: _perishable, frail,
poor_: _weak, sinful_, CP. [lǣn]

lǣnelic _passing, transitory_.

lǣnend m. _lender_, _WW_. [‘_lenend_’]

lǣnendlic = lǣnelic

lǣnere m. ‘_lender_,’ _WW_ 189^21.

læng = leng

længten- = lencten-

lǣnian = lēanian

lǣnland n. _leased land_, v. LL 2·323.

lǣnlic = lǣnelic

-lǣnung v. feoh-l.

læpeldre f. _dish_, Æ.

læpewince (e) f. _lapwing_, #Gl#.

læppa (a) m. _lappet, piece, section, lobe, portion, district_, _CP,
Lcd_; Æ. [‘_lap_’]

-læppede v. fīf-l.

±lǣran (ē) _to teach, instruct_, _A, BH_: _enjoin, advise, persuade,
urge, preach_. l. forð _hand down (to others)_: (+) _convert_: (+)
†_recall_, ES 37·197. ±lǣred _learned (opposed to_ lǣwed), hence
_clerical_ (_as opposed to lay)_, _spiritual (as opposed to temporal)_,
Æ, CP. [‘_lere_’]

+lǣre _empty, hungry_, NC 295. [_Ger._ leer]

+lǣrednes f. _learning, skill_, BH.

lǣrest = lǣst

lǣrestre f. _instructress_, Æ.

lǣrgedēfe _adapted for instruction_? FT 61.

lǣrig m. _edge, border (of a shield)_? v. A 37·55.

-lǣrigian v. ymb-l.  [[headword spelled “ymblǣrgian”]]

lǣringmǣden n. _female pupil_.

lǣringmann m. _disciple_, RB 20^6.

lǣrnes f. _emptiness_, _Lcd_ 22b. [‘_leerness_’]

læs pret. 3 sg. of lesan.

lǣs I. (ē) adv. and sbn. _less, lest_, Æ, AO, CP. ðȳ lǣs (ðe) conj. w.
subj. _lest_. II. f. gs. lǣswe _pasture_, _JnL_ (ē), _WW_; Æ; Mdf.
[‘_lease_,’ ‘_leasow_’] III. f. (_blood-_)_letting_, #Lcd#.

lǣsboren _of lower birth_, LL (246^21).

lǣsest (MtR) = lǣst I.

lǣsian = lǣswian

lǣson pret. pl. of lesan.

lǣssa adj. (comp. of lȳtel) _‘less,’ smaller, fewer_, _Æ, Bo, Chr_:
_inferior_, _MtL, MtR_ (ē). sb. _A, Æ_. adv. _BH_.

læst f. _fault, sin_, NC 305. [_ON._]

lǣst I. superl. of lȳtel ‘_least_,’ _Gu, Lcd_; CP, AO. ðe lǣste _lest_,
CM. II. f. _performance, fulfilment_, #Ex# 308. III. = lāst

±lǣstan (ē) _to follow, help, serve_, _B, Bl, Met, OET_; AO _perform,
do, carry out, accomplish_, AO: _endure, last, continue_, _Cr_; Æ:
_furnish, pay_, W [‘_last_’; _Ger._ leisten]

lǣste f. _‘last’ (for the foot)_, _WW_.

lǣstend m. _doer, performer_, BH.

+lǣstfullian _to testify_, #LPs# 80^9.

lǣstwyrhta (eo^2) m. _shoemaker_, WW.

lǣswe v. lǣs II.

±lǣswian _to depasture, graze, feed_, _Æ, LkL_. [‘_leasow_’]

læt I. (lat- in obl. cases) comp. lætra; sup. lætest, lætemest _slow_,
_B, Bl, CP, Lcd_; Æ: _slack, lax, negligent_: ‘_late_,’ _Lk_. II. m.
_man of the class between the slave and the ceorl_, _LL_ (v. 2·564).
[‘_laet_’]

lǣt pres. 3 sg. of lǣdan.

+lǣt = +lǣte II.

lǣtan^7 pret. 3 sg. lēt, leort (tr.) _to allow to remain, leave behind,
depart from_, _‘let’ alone_, _Bl, CP_: _leave undone_, _BH_: (±)
_bequeath_, _EC_: _allow_, _Bl, LL_: _cause to do_, _BH_: _regard as,
consider_, _BH, Chr_, CP: _behave towards, treat_: (intr.) _allow to
escape, emit, let out, set free_, _Æ, Lcd_: _‘let’ (on lease)_, _BC_:
_assert, pretend_, _Lk_: (+) _allot, assign_. l. from _refrain from_
(late); +l. nēah land _approach the shore_? (ES 37·191); on bæc l.
_leave behind_.

lǣtanīa = lētanīa

lætbyrd f. _slow birth_, #Lcd# 185a.

+lǣte I. n. _manners, bearing_, NC 295. [_ON._ lǣti] II. n. _junction of
roads_, Æ.

lætemest I. adv. _lastly, finally_, _NG_. II. v. læt. [‘_latemost_’]

læthȳdig _slow-minded, dull_, #Cra# 10.

lætlīce adv. _slowly_, _Gu_. [‘_lately_’]

lætmest = lætemest

lætnes f. _slowness, delay_, ÆL 23b^647: _sloth_, GD 174^23.

lætra (_Æ, LL_) v. lǣt. [‘_latter_’]

lætrǣde _slow, deliberate_, CP 149^14.

lætsum _backward_, _Chr_. [‘_latesom_’]

lǣtt f. (pl. latta) _beam, ‘lath,’_ _WW_.

lǣttēow = lāttēow

lǣttewestre f. _guide, conductress_, Æ. [lāttēow]

lætting = letting

-lætto v. un-l.

lǣð n. _a division of a county containing several hundreds, ‘lathe,’_
_BC_ 3·162: _landed property_? _(meadow) land_? LL 400[3,2].

lǣðan _to abuse, revile, hate_: _cause to shun_, RB 11^18. [lāð]

lǣðð, lǣððo (CP) f. _wrong, injury_: _hatred, malice_, _Bl_. [‘_leth_’;
lāð]

lǣuw = lēow

lǣwa (ē) m. _betrayer, traitor_, _Lk_; Æ. [v. ‘_lewe_’]

±lǣwan _to betray_. [_Goth._ lēwjan]

-lǣwe v. druncen-, hunger-l.

lǣwede _lay, laic, unlearned_. as sb. _layman_, _BH_; Æ, CP. [‘_lewd_’]

læwel = læfel

lǣwend m. _betrayer, traitor_, #Gl#.

lǣwerce = lāwerce

læwil = læfel

læx = leax

lāf f. _what is left, remnant, legacy, relic, remains, rest_, _Bl, Chr_;
Æ: _relict, widow_, Æ, AO. tō lāfe _alone_. tō lāfe bēon _to remain
over_. wǣpna, daroða l. _survivors of battle_. hamora lāfa _results of
forging, swords_. [‘_lave_’; līfan]

lāferce = lāwerce

±lafian _to pour water on, wash_, _‘lave,’ bathe_, _B, Lcd_: _ladle
out_, _Lcd_.

lag- = lah-

-laga v. lund-l.

lage- = lagu-

lagen pp. of lēan II.

±lagian _to appoint, ordain_, _W_. [‘_law_,’ ‘_i-lahen_’]

lago- = lagu-

-lagol v. ǣ-l.

lāgon = lǣgon pret. pl. of licgan.

lagu I. f. (old neut. pl. lagu; #Chr# 1052#d#) _‘law,’ ordinance, rule,
regulation_, Æ; _Chr, LL, RB_: _right, legal privilege_, LL: _district
governed by the same laws_. II. m. _water, flood, sea, ocean_, _Gen,
Met_: _name of the rune for =l=_. [‘_lay_’]

+lagu np. _extent, surface (of sea)_, #Seaf# 64? [_OS._ gilagu]

lagucræftig _skilled in seafaring_, B 209.

lagufæsten † n. _sea, ocean_.

lagufæðm m. _enveloping waves_, #Rd# 61^7.

laguflōd m. _wave, stream, waters, sea, ocean_.

lagulād † f. _water-way, sea_.

lagumearg m. _sea-horse, ship_, #Gu# 1306.

lagusīð † m. _sea-journey_.

lagustrǣt f. _sea-path_, B 239.

lagustrēam † m. _water, sea, ocean_.

laguswimmend † m. _swimming in the sea (fish)_.

lāh pret. 3 sg. of lēon.

lah- = lag-

lahbreca m. _law-breaker, impious man_, #Sc# 9^10.

lahbrecende _impious, profane_, #Sc# 9^9.

lahbryce m. _breach of the law_, LL.

lah-cēap, -cōp m. _money paid (by an outlaw) for restitution of legal
rights_, LL.

lahlic _lawful, legal_, #Sc# 46^2. adv. -līce.

lahmann m. _an official declarer of the law_, _LL_ 376. [v. ‘_lawman_’]

lahriht n. _legal right_, LL.

lah-slitt fn., -slite m. _fine for breach of the (Danish) law_, LL.

lahwita m. _lawyer_, LL (308^13).

lām n. _‘loam,’ clay, earth_, _Æ, WW_; Mdf.

lama (o) wk. adj. and sb. m. _crippled, lame, paralytic, weak (man)_,
_Æ, BH, Cp, El, Mt, WW_.

lamb (Æ), pl. lamb(e)ru, lambor (A) n. ‘_lamb_,’ _Æ, G, Gl, Gu, WW_.

lambyrd f. _imperfect birth_, #Lcd# 185a.

lāmfæt n. † _vessel of clay (the body)_.

lamp I. pret. 3 sg. of limpan. II. (#KGl#) = lamb

lamprēde f. _lamprey_. [_L._]

lām-pytt, -sēaða m. ‘_loampit_,’ Ct.

lāmwyrhta m. _potter_, G.

lān = lǣn

lanan obl. cases of lanu.

land (o) n. _earth_, _‘land,’ soil_, _B, BH, VPs, WW_; Mdf: _territory,
realm, province, district_, _Cp, Chr, Bl, VPs_: _landed property_, _Æ,
Bl_: _country (not town)_, _Æ, BH_: _ridge in a ploughed field_.

+landa m. _compatriot, kinsman_, WW 211^20.

landādl = hlandādl?  [[Cross-reference unidentified.]]

landælf f. _land-elf_, WW 516^27.

landāgend m. _native_, BH.

landāgende _owning land_, LL.

landār f. _landed property_, Æ.

landbegenga (i^2) m. _husbandman, peasant, native_, CP.

landbegengnes f. _habitation_, #BPs# 119^5 (o^1).

landbigong m. _dwelling in a country_, #BPs# 118^54 (o^1)

landbōc f. _‘land book,’ written grant of land_, _Ct, WW_.

landbrǣce m. _first ploughing (after land has lain fallow)_, WW 105^11.

landbūend I. mf. _inhabitant, native_: _husbandman_. II. f. _colony_.

landbūende _dwelling on the land, native_.

landbūnes f. _colony, settlement_, #Nar#.

land-cēap, -cōp m. _fine paid to the lord on the alienation of land_,
_BC_. [‘_landcheap_’]

landefen m. _measure or proportion of land_, #Chr# 1085.

landesmann = landmann

landfæsten n. _natural fortress_, AO 80^14 (o^1).

landfeoh n. _recognitory rent for land_, KC.

landfolc n. _people of the country, inhabitants_, _Æ_. [‘_landfolk_’]

landfruma m. _ruler, prince_, B 31.

landfyrd f. _army_.

landgafol n. _land-tax, tribute_, _LL_. [‘_land-gavel_’]

landgehwerf n. _exchange of land_, Ct.

landgemaca m. _neighbour_, OEG.

land-gemǣre, -gemirce n. _boundary, limit, frontier_, AO.

landgesceaft f. _earthly creature_, #Da# 360.

landgeweorc n. _fortified place_, B 938.

landgewyrpe n. _heap of earth_? Ct.

landhæbbende _owning or ruling land_.

landhæfen f. _real property_, LL 22[32].

landhere m. _native force_: _land force (opposed to naval force)_.

landhlāford m. _lord of a country, lord of a manor, landlord_.

landhredding f. _redemption of land_.

landlagu f. _local law_, LL.

landlēas _not owning land_, _LL_. [‘_landless_’]

land-lēod m., nap. -lēode, -lēoda, -lēodan _inhabitant of a country,
native_, AO.

landlyre m. _loss of territory_, #Chr# 1105.

landmann m. _inhabitant of a country, native_, _Ex, LL_. [‘_landmann_’]

landmearc m. _boundary_.

+landod _having landed property_, LL 182[11].

landopenung f. _first ploughing of land_, WW 147^9.

landrǣden v. ealdlandrǣden.

landrest f. _grave_. #An# 782.

landrīca m. _landed proprietor_.

landrīce n. _territory_, AO.

landriht n. _‘land-right,’ right to own or occupy land or connected with
its occupation_, _B, Ex, Gen_: _that which is due from land or estates_.

landscearu (a^2) f. _tract of land, province, country_, CP: _boundary,
landmark_. [v. CC 48]

landscipe m. _region_, #Gen# 376.

landscoru = landscearu

landsēta m. _settler_, WW 111^15. [sǣta]

landseten f. _occupation of land_: _occupied land, estate_.

landseðla m. _occupier of land_, TC 593^6.

landsidu m. _custom of a country_, CP.

landsittende _occupying land_, #Chr#.

landsōcn † f. _search for land to settle on_.

landspēd f. _landed property_, KC 3·349^24.

landspēdig _rich in land_, Æ.

landsplott m. _plot of land_, KC 4·39^12.

landstede m. _region_, #Wif# 16 (o).

landstycce n. _small plot of ground_, GD, LL.

landwaru f. _inhabitants, population_, B 2321.

landweard m. _coast-warden_, B 1890.

landwela m. _earthly possessions_, #Ph# 505.

lane = lanu

lang (o) comp. lengra, superl. lengest _‘long,’ tall_, _AO, BH, Lcd,
MH_; CP.

+lang (usu. w. æt or on) _dependent on, attainable from, present in,
belonging to_, _Æ, AO, Gu_. [v. ‘_along_’]

langafrīgedæg m. _Good Friday_.

langað = langoð

langbolster mn. _feather-bed_, WW 276^36.

lange (o) adv. comp. leng, lenge, superl. lengest _‘long,’ a long time,
far_, _B, BH, Bl, Bo_.

langfǣre _lasting, protracted_, Æ.

langfērnes f. _length, long duration_, #Sc# 29^1.

langfirst m. _long space of time_, #Gu# 920.

langgestrēon n. _ancient store of wealth_, B 2240.

langian (o) (impers. with acc. of pers.) _to ‘long’ for, yearn after,
grieve for, be pained_, _AO_ (o): _grow longer_, _Lcd_: _summon_:
_belong_.

+langian _to send for, summon, call_, Æ: _apprehend, seize_, LL
202[6,2].

langieldo f. _advanced age_.

langlīce adv. _for a long time, long, at length_, Æ.

langlīfe _long-lived_.

langmōd _constant, patient, long-suffering_. adv. -līce.

langmōdig _long-suffering_ (v. late), NC 347.

langmōdnes f. _long-suffering_, #Sc# 10^17.

langnes f. _length_, _Æ_. [‘_longness_’]

langoð m. _longing, unsatisfied craving, discontent_.

langsceaft _having a long shaft_.

langscip n. _man of war_, #Chr# 897#a#.

langstrang ‘_longanimis_,’ #LPs# 102^8.

langsum _long, lasting, tedious, protracted_, _B_ (o), _Lcd_; Æ.
[‘_longsome_’] adv. -līce, AO 58^17 (o).

langsumnes f. _length_, _Ps_; Æ. [‘_longsomeness_’]

langsweored (y^2) _long-necked_.

langtwidig _lasting, assured_, B 1708.

langung (o) f. _‘longing,’ desire_, _Bl_: _weariness, sadness,
dejection_, Æ: _delay_, CP (o). [langian]

langunghwīl f. _time of weariness_, #An# 125.

langweb n. _warp (in weaving)_, WW 187^12.

langwege ‘_peregre_,’ MkL 13^34 (o^1, œ^2).

langwyrpe _oblong_, NC 305^347.

lānland = lǣnland

lann (o) † f. _chain, fetter_.

lanu (o) f. _‘lane,’ street_, _Bl_.

lapian _to ‘lap’ up, drink_, _Lcd_; Æ.

lappa (#Gl#) = læppa

lār f. _‘lore,’ learning, science, art of teaching, preaching,
doctrine_, _Bl_; Æ, CP: _precept, exhortation, advice, instigation_,
_JnL_; AO: _history, story_: _cunning_, #Gen# 2693.

lārbōc f. _book containing instruction (used of St Paul’s Epistles, and
Bede’s works)_, Æ.

lārbodung f. _teaching, preaching_, NC 305.

lārbysn f. _example_, WW 163^43.

lārcniht m. _disciple_, LkL p 2^2.

lārcræft m. _knowledge_, #Sol# 3.

lārcwide † m. _teaching, precept_.

lardōm m. _teaching, instruction_, LL 258[51].

lār-ēow, -ow, -uw (a) m. _teacher, master, preacher_, _BH, JnL_; Æ, AO,
CP. [‘_lorthew_’]

lārēowdōm m. _function of teacher, instruction_, CP: _ecclesiastical
authority_, Æ, CP.

lārēowlic _like a teacher_, OEG.

lārēowsetl n. _teacher’s seat, pulpit_.

lārēwes = lārēowes gs. of lārēow.

lārfæsten n. _prescribed fast_, A 11·99.

lārhlystend m. _catechumen_, OEG 2881.

lārhūs n. _school_, #HGl# 405.

lārlēast (ē, ȳ) f. _want of instruction, ignorance_.

lārlic _conducive to learning, instructive_, Æ. betwux larlīcum gefylcum
_amongst soldiers in training_, Æ.

lārsmið † m. (nap. -smeoðas) _teacher, counsellor_.

lārspell n. _homily, sermon, treatise_, _Æ_. [‘_lorespell_’]

lārsum _teachable_, NC 305.

lārswice m. _trickery_, W 309^14.

lārðēaw (MF), lāruwa (N) = (*lārðēow), lārēow

lārðegn m. _teacher_, NC 305.

lārwita m. _learned man_, LL (308^13).

lāser (o^2) m? _weed, tare_, #Gl#.

lāst (ǣ, ē, ēa) m. _sole of foot_: _spoor, footprint, track, trace_, _B,
Bl_; Æ, CP. on lāst(e) _behind, after, in pursuit of_. on l. lecgan _to
follow_. lāstas lecgan _to go_: _gait, step_. [‘_last_’]

±lāst (ǣ, ē) n. _accomplishment, observance_, RB 5^5: _duty, due,
obligation, vow_.

+lāstful _helpful, serviceable_, _LL_; AO. [‘_lastfull_’]

lāstweard m. _successor, heir_: _pursuer_.

lāstword n. _fame after death_, #Seaf# 73.

lasur = laser  [[headword spelled “lāser”]]

lat- v. læt-.

late adv. comp. lator, sup. latest ‘_late_,’ _Chr, Jul_: _slowly_,
_Lcd_: _at last_, AO. [læt]

latemest = lætemest II.

lātēow = lāttēow

±latian _to be slow, indolent_: _linger, delay, hesitate_, Æ.

lator, adv. comp., latost (æ), superl. _slower, later_, _A, Bo, MtR_;
AO, CP. [‘_latter_,’ ‘_last_’]

latt = lætt  [[headword spelled “lǣtt”]]

lattēh f. _guiding rein_, WW 120^9. [lād]

lāttēow, lāttēowa (ǣ) m. _leader, guide, general_, _Bo, VPs_ (lad-); AO,
CP. [‘_lattew_’]

lāttēowdōm m. _leadership, guidance, instruction_, CP.

latung f. _delay, hindrance_, OEG 7^129.

lātðēow, lātuw = lāttēow

lāð I. (±) _hated, hateful, hostile, malignant, evil_, _AO, B_:
_loathsome, noxious, grievous, unpleasant_, _Ep_; CP. [‘_loath_’] II. n.
_pain, harm, injury, misfortune_, AO: _insult, annoyance, harmful
thing_, _BH, Lcd_; CP. [‘_loath_’; _Ger._ leid]

lāðbite m. _wound_, B 1122.

lāðe adv. _inimically, in detestation_.

lāðēow = lāttēow

lāðettan _to hate, loathe_: _make hurtful or repulsive_, Æ.

lāðgenīðla † m. _persecutor, foe_.

lāðgetēona † m. _enemy_.

lāðgewinna m. _enemy_, #Rd# 16^29.

laðian _to invite, summon, call upon, ask_, Æ, CP. [_Ger._ laden]

lāðian _to hate, be hated_, _AO_; Æ. [‘_loathe_’]

lāðlēas _inoffensive, innocent_.

lāðlic _‘loathly,’ hateful, horrible, repulsive, unpleasant_, _BH_; Æ.
adv. -līce.

lāðscipe m. _misfortune_, #Gen# 2048.

lāðsearu n? _hateful, contrivance_, #Da# 436.

lāðsīð m. _painful journey, death_, #Ex# 44.

lāðspel n. _sad tidings_, AO.

lāððēow = lāttēow

±laðung f. _calling, invitation_, CP: _assembly, congregation, church_,
Æ. [‘_lathing_’]

lāðwende † _hateful, hostile, bad_.

lāðwendemōd _hostile minded_, #Gen# 448.

lāðweorc n. _evil deed_, #PPs# 105^26.

laur m. _laurel, bay, laver_, #Lcd#.

laurbēam (lawer-) m. _laurel_.

laurberige f. _laurel-berry_, #Lcd#.

laurice (_Cp_) = lāwerce

laurtrēow n. _laurel-tree_, #Lcd#.

lauwer, lawer = laur

lāwerce (ǣ) f. ‘_lark_,’ _WW_; Mdf.

lēa I. (#VPs#) = lēo. II. gdas. of lēah.

lēac I. (ǣ, ē, ēo) n. _‘leek,’ onion, garlic garden-herb_, _Lcd_; Æ. II.
pret. 3 sg. of lūcan.

lēac- = lēah-

lēacblæd n. _leek leaf_, NC 305.

lēaccærse (e^2) f., _cress, nasturtium_, #Lcd#.

leac-trog, -troc, -tric = leahtroc

lēactūn (lēah-, lēh-) m. _kitchen-garden, garden of herbs_, _LkL, WW_.
[‘_leighton_’]

lēactūnweard (ē^1) m. _gardener_, _WW_ 127^14. [‘_leightonward_’]

lēacweard (e^1, o^2) m. _gardener_.

lēad (ē) n. ‘_lead_,’ _BH_; Æ, CP: _leaden vessel, cauldron_, _A_ 9·264.

lēaden (ē) ‘_leaden_,’ _Æ, LL_.

lēadgedelf n. _lead-mine_, KC 3·401^7.

lēadgeota (o) m. _plumber_, LL 455[16].

lēadgewiht n. _lead-weight, a scale of weight_, v. CC 77.

lēadstæf m. _loaded stick for beating with_, WW 441^20.

lēaf (ī) I. (±) f. _‘leave,’ permission, privilege_, _BH, Chr_; Æ, CP.
II. n. _‘leaf,’ shoot_, pl. _foliage_, _MtL_ (ēo), _VPs_; Æ: _sheet of
paper_, _BH_.

±lēafa m. _belief, faith_, _Æ, Mt_; AO. [‘_leve_’; _Ger._ glaube]

±lēafe (ǣ) f. _leave, permission, licence_, Æ.

±lēafful _believing_, _JnR_: _faithful, trustworthy_, _MtL_.
[‘_leafful_’] adv. -līce.

+lēaffulnes f. _faith, trust, faithfulness_, Æ.

lēafhelmig _leafy at the top_, GPH 390.

±lēafhlystend (e) m. _believing listener, catechumen_, OEG.

+lēaflēas _unbelieving_, Æ.

+lēaflēasnes f. _unbelief_, W 294^2.

+lēaf-lēast, -lȳst f. _unbelief_, Æ.

lēafleoht _light, easy_, RB 5^19.

+lēaflic _credible, faithful_, Æ. adv. -līce.

lēafnes (ē, ȳ) f. _leave, permission_, BH.

+lēafnesword n. _password_, B 245.

lēafscead n. _leafy shade_, #Ph# 205.

+lēafsum _believing, faithful_: _credible_.

lēafwyrm (i^2) m. _caterpillar_, #ASPs# 77^51.

lēag I. (ē) f. _‘lye,’ alkalized water_, _Ep, Lcd_. II. = lēah I. III.
pret. 3 sg. of lēogan.

lēagung f. _lying_, #Nar# 2^21. [lēogan]

lēah I. lēage (#Chr#) m. _piece of ground_, _‘lea,’ meadow_, _BC_; Mdf.
II. = lēag I. and III.

leahte pret. 3 sg. of leccan.

leahter == leahtor

leahtor (e^1) m. _vice, sin, offence, crime, fault_, Æ, CP: _reproach_:
_disease, injury_, #Lcd#.

leahtorbēre _laughable, causing laughter_, RB 18^8. [hleahtor]

leahtorcwide m. _opprobrious speech_, #Jul# 199.

leahtorful (e^1, e^2) _vicious, seductive_.

leahtorlēas _faultless, blameless_.

leahtorlīce _foully, wickedly_, Æ.

-leahtorwyrðe v. un-l.

leahtras nap. of leahtor.

leahtrian (e) _to accuse, revile, reprove, blame_, _Æ_; AO, CP:
_corrupt_. [‘_lehtrie_’]

leah-troc, -tric, -trog m. _lettuce_. [_L._ lactuca]

lēahtrung (ē) f. _blaming, detraction_, WW 150^1.

lēahtūn = lēactūn

lēan I. n. _reward, gift, loan, compensation, remuneration,
retribution_, _B, Mt_; Æ. [‘_lean_’; _Ger._ lohn] II. sv^6 (pret. 3 sg.
lōg, lōh) and wv. _to blame, censure, reproach_, AO, CP.

lēangyfa m. _rewarder_, #Lcd# 3·436^23.

±lēanian (ǣ) _to reward, recompense, repay, requite_, Æ, CP. [_Ger._
lohnen]

lēap m. _basket_, _W_: _basket for catching or keeping fish_, _WW_:
_measure_: _trunk (body)_, #Jud# 111. [‘_leap_’]

lēas I. adj. (w. g.) _without, free from, devoid of, bereft of_: (±)
_false, faithless_: _untruthful, deceitful_, _WW_; Æ: _vain, worthless_.
II. n. _falsehood, lying_, _Bo_; CP. [‘_lease_’]

lēasbrēd (-bregd) I. _lying, false, deceitful_, Æ. II. m. _cheating,
trickery_.

lēasbrēda m. _trickster_, ES 43·306.

lēasbrēdende _wily, deceitful_, #ÆGr# 286^6.

lēasbrēdnes f. _deception, falsehood_.

lēasbregd == lēasbrēd

lēascræft m. _false art_, Æ.

lēasere m. _liar, hypocrite_, _MtL_: _buffoon, mime, jester, fool_.
[‘_leaser_’]

lēasest (_MtL_) = lǣst I.

lēasettan _to pretend_, Æ, RB.

lēas-ferhð, -fyrhð, _false_, NC 305.

lēasferðnes f. _levity, folly_, CP.

lēasfyrhte = lēasferhð

lēasgewitnes f. _false witness_, Æ.

lēasgielp m. _vainglory_, CP.

lēasian _to lie_, _Ps_. [‘_lease_’]

lēaslic _false, deceitful, sham, empty_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce, Æ, CP.

lēaslīccettan _to dissemble_, WW 388^33.

lēaslīcettung f. _dissimulation_.

lēasmōdnes f. _instability_, CP 308^6.

lēasnes f. _lying_: _levity_, BH 322^23.

lēasōleccan _to blandish, flatter_, GD 34^27.

lēasōlecung f. _empty blandishment_, WW 430^21.

lēassagol (u^3) _lying, false_, Æ.

lēasscēawere m. _spy_, B 253.

lēasspell n. _lie, fiction, fable_.

lēasspellung f. _empty talk_, AO.

lēassponung f. _allurement_, WW 452^3.

lēast = lāst

lēast- = læst-

lēastyhtan _to cajole_, WW 431^4.

lēastyhtung f. _cajolery_, WW 430^21.

lēasuht (= wiht?) _enticer, seducer_, OEG 4014

lēasung f. _‘leasing,’ lying, false witness, deceit, hypocrisy,
artifice_, _JnL_: _a lie_, _Ps_: _empty talk, frivolity_.

lēasungspell n. _idle tale_, AO 40^8.

lēat pret. 3 sg. of lūtan.

leatian = latian

+leaðian = +laðian

lēaðor n. _soap, soda_, _Lcd, WW_. [‘_lather_’]

lēaðorwyrt (lēoðo-) f. _soap-wort_? #Lcd# 16a.

lēawede = lǣwede

lēawfinger m. _index-finger, forefinger_, #PPs# 72^11.

leax m. _salmon_, _Cp_ (æ), _Met, WW_ (e); ÆL. [‘_lax_’]

leb- = lef-, læf-

lec = hlec

+lec pret. 3 sg. of +lacan.

lēc I. m. _look, regard_, Æ; A 11·118^50. II. = lēac I. and II.

+lecc- = +læcc-

leccan pret. 3 sg. leahte, le(o)hte _to water, irrigate, wet, moisten,
slake_, CP. [cp. _Ger._ lechzen]

leccing f. _irrigation, watering_, _WW (KGl)_. [‘_leaching_’]

lēce == lǣce

lēcetere (#KGl# 65^29) = līcettere

±lecgan _to ‘lay,’ put, place, deposit, set_, _Æ, Gen, Lcd, MtL, Rd_;
CP. l. on (w. d.) _put upon, charge with_, _Chr, Gu_; CP: _bury_, Jn:
_put before, submit_, _Æ_: _betake oneself, go_. lāstas l. _go,
journey_. on lāst l. _follow_: _lay (egg)_, _Lcd_: _prostrate, cast
down, lay low, kill_, _Bo, Lk, LL_. [causative of licgan]

lēciwyrt (Cp) = lǣcewyrt

lēcnian (NG) = lācnian

lectric = leahtroc

lēctūn- = lēahtūn-

lecða m. ‘_sentina_,’ #Gl#, WW.

lēd = lēad

lēdan = lǣdan

lēde = legde, pret. 3 sg. of lecgan.

lēden == lǣden, lēaden

lēf I. (ī) _feeble, infirm, weak, injured_. II. = lēaf

lēf- = lēaf-

lēfan = (1) līefan; (2) lǣfan

+lēfed _weak, sickly, aged_.

lefel, lefil = læfel

+lēfenscipe m. _justification_, JnL 15^22.

lēfmon m. _sick person_, #GnE# 45.

left (K; ?= lyft*) ‘_inanis_,’ QF 1^443.

lēft (#SPs#) = lēst, lǣst

lēfung f. _paralysis_, ÆH 2·486^18.

leg (= læg) pret. 3 sg. of licgan.

lēg = (1) līeg; (2) lēah

lēg- = līg-, lēog-

lēga (A) = lǣwa

legde pret. 3 sg. of lecgan.

+lege f? _lair, bed_, Mdf.

lēgelēoht n. _light (of flame)_, MFH 168.

legen pp. of licgan.

leger n. _lying, illness_, _AO, B_; Æ: _‘lair,’ couch, bed_, _Wif_:
_grave_, _LL_; Æ. clǣne legere _consecrated grave_. on līfe ge on legere
_in life and in death_, LL. [licgan]

legerbǣre _sick, ill_, TC 611^20.

legerbedd n. _bed, sick bed_, Æ: _bed of death, grave_.

+legered _confined to bed_, Æ.

legerfæst _sick, ill_, RB 64^7.

+legergield n. ‘_lupercalia_,’ WW 437^14.

legerstōw f. _burial place_, Æ.

legertēam m. _cohabitation, marriage_.

legerwīte fm. _fine for unlawful cohabitation_, _LL_. [‘_lairwite_’]

lēges = lēages gs. of lēah.

legeð pres. 3 sg. of lecgan.

legie f. _legion_, AO. [_L._]

-legu v. ealdor-l.

leh- = leah-

lēh = lēah

lēh- = lēac-

lēhnan = lȳgnian  [[headword spelled “lygnian”]]

lēht == lēoht

lehtan = lihtan  [[headword spelled “līhtan”]]

lehte pret. 3 sg. of leccan.

lehtor = leahtor

lēl (#KGl#) = lǣl

leloðre f. _silverweed_? #Gl#.

lemb = lamb

lēmen (#KGl# 82^40) = lǣmen

±lemian (æ) _to subdue_, CP 303^11: _lame, disable_, B 905.

lempedu f. _lamprey_, _WW_ 438^17. [‘_limpet_’; lampreda]

lemphealt _limping_, _Gl, WW_. [‘_limphalt_’]

lēnan (#KGl#) = lǣnan

lencten (æ) I. m. _springtime_, _A, Lcd_; Æ: _the fast of Lent_, W. II.
adj. _pertaining to Lent_, _A, RB_ (æ). [‘_lenten_’]

lenctenādl f. _spring fever, tertian ague_.

lenctenbere m. _Lent barley_, ANS 84^326.

lenctenbryce m. _breach of the Lenten fast_, LL 344[47].

lenctendæg m. _day of Lent_.

lenctenerðe f. _land ploughed in spring_, WW 105^7. [eorðe]

lenctenfæsten n. _Lent_, Æ.

lenctenhǣto f. _heat of spring_, AO 102^6?

lenctenlic _of spring, vernal_, Æ: _lenten_, Æ.

lenctenlifen f. _Lenten fare_, NC 306.

lenctensufel (længt-) n. _Lent food_, LL 450[9].

lenctentīd f. _spring, Lent_, Æ.

lenctentīma m. _spring_, OEG 3837.

lenctenwuce f. _a week in Lent_.

lenctin- = lencten-

+lend I. _furnished with land (by the lord)_, LL 448´. II. = +lynd

+lenda m. _one rich in land_, OEG 3154.

lendan _to land, arrive_, _Chr_; Æ, AO, CP: (+) _endow with land_, Æ.
[‘_lend_’; land]

lende- = lenden-

lendenbān n. _loin-bone_, _WW_ 159^13. [‘_lendbone_’]

lenden-brǣde, -brēde f. _loin_.

lendensīd _reaching to the loins_, NC 306.

lendenu (æ) np. _loins, reins_, _Mt, WW_; Æ. [‘_lend_’; _Ger._ lenden]

lendenwyrc m. _a disease of the kidneys_, WW 113^12. [wærc]

-lendisc v. dūn-, ūp-, ūre-, ūt-l.

lēne = lǣne

leng I. (æ) f. _length, height_, Æ. II. adv. (comp. of lange) _longer_,
_Æ, Lk_. [‘_leng_’]

±lengan _to lengthen, prolong, protract, delay_, _Da_: _extend, reach,
attain_: _belong_. [‘_leng_’]

lengcten- = lencten-

lenge (æ) I. adj. (±) _belonging, related_: _near (of time)_, B 83. II.
v. lange.

+lenge _belonging to, related to_, Æ: _addicted to_.

lengest (_Chr, Mk_) superl. of lang, lange. [‘_lengest_’]

lengfære _more durable_, ANS 119·435.

lengian (impers. w. a.) _to long for, ask for_, #Sol# 270 (GK).

lenglīfra comp. of langlīfe.

lengo = lengu

lengra (_BH_) comp. of lang. [‘_lenger_’]

lengten == lencten

lengtogra comp. adj. _drawn out farther, more prolix_, #Sc# 161^18.

lengðu f. ‘_length_,’ _AO_ 144^1.

lengu f. _length_, _Bo, BH_: _height_, _Sol_. [‘_lengh_’]

lent f. _lentil_, #Gl#. [_L._ lentem]

lenten = lencten

lēo mf. gdas. lēon, also ds. lēone, lēonan, asf. lēo, and dp. lēonum
_‘lion,’ lioness_, _AO_, Æ. [_L._]

lēoc (WW 283^21) = lēac

lēod I. m. _man_, LL 14[25]: ‘wergeld’ _for manslaughter_, LL (=
lēodgeld): (+) _fellow-countryman, compatriot_: (†) _chief, prince,
king_, _B_. [‘_lede_’] II. f. (usu. in pl. lēode) _people, nation_, _B,
Bl_; Æ, AO. [‘_lede_’]

leoda = lida

lēoda I. = +lēod I. II. (LWS) = lēode

lēodan^2 _to spring up, grow_: _spring from_.

lēodbealu † n. _calamity to a people_.

lēodbisceop m. _suffragan bishop, provincial_, Æ.

lēodburg † f. _town_.

lēodbygen f. _sale of one’s compatriots, slave-traffic_, LL 20[11Ld]
(v. 2·133).

lēodcyning m. _king, ruler_, B 54.

lēode fp. _men, people, country_, _B, Lk_; AO (v. lēod).

lēoden = lȳden

lēodfruma † m. _prince, patriarch, chief_.

lēodgeard † m. _country_.

lēodgebyrga † m. _lord, protector, prince, king_.

lēodgeld n. ‘wergeld’ _for manslaughter_, LL.

lēodgeðincð f. _order, rank_, LL.

lēodgewinn n. _strife_, #Jul# 201.

lēodgota = lēadgeota

lēodgryre m. _general terror_, #Sol# 278.

lēodhata m. _persecutor, tyrant_, GD.

lēodhete † m. _popular hatred, hostility_.

lēodhryre † m. _fall of a prince_ (_or nation_?), B 2030, 2391.

lēodhwæt _very valiant_, #El# 11.

-lēodisc v. ðider-l.

lēodmǣg † m. _relative, comrade_.

lēodmægen † n. _might of the people, host power, virtue_.

lēodmearc † f. _domain, country_.

lēodrǣden f. _country, region_, GD 204^23.

lēodriht n. _law of the land_.

lēodrūne f. _pythoness, sorceress_.

lēodscearu f. _tribe, nation_, #Ex# 337.

lēodsceaða † m. _public enemy_.

lēodscipe m. _nation, people_, Æ: _country, region_.

lēodstefn m. _race, tribe_, #PPs# 82^7.

lēodðēaw m. _popular usage_.

lēodweard † f. _government_.

lēodweras † mp. _men, human beings_.

lēodwerod n. _host of people_, #Ex# 77.

lēodwita m. _wise man, elder, chief_, LL 456.

lēodwynn f. _home joy_, †Hy 4^89.

lēodwyrhta = lēoðwyrhta

lēof I. adj. _dear, valued, beloved, pleasant, agreeable_, _Æ, B, Chr,
CP_. II. m. _beloved one, friend_: (in addressing persons) _sir! sire!
Æ, EC_: _impure companion_, GPH 394. [‘_lief_’]

leofen = lifen

leofian (_Bl_) = libban

lēofian _to be or become dear_, #Gu# 110.

lēoflic _dear, lovable, pleasant, beautiful, delightful_, _B_:
_precious, valued_. adv. -līce _lovingly, kindly, gladly, willingly_,
_BH_. [‘_liefly_’]

lēofspell n. _good news_, #El# 1017.

lēof-tǣl, -tǣle _kind, lovable, loving, dear, grateful, agreeable_, CP.

lēofwende _kind, loving, gracious, acceptable, estimable, agreeable_.

lēofwendum _ardently_.

±lēogan^2 _to ‘lie,’_ _Bl, WW_: (w. d.) _deceive, belie, betray_, Æ, CP:
_be in error_, #ÆGr#.

lēogere (e^1, o^2) m. _‘liar,’ false witness_, _W, MtL_; Æ: _hypocrite_,
MkL 7^6.

lēoht (ē, ī) I. _‘light,’ not heavy_, _AO, BH, Rd_; CP: _slight, easy,
trifling, inconsiderable_, _CP, Mt, Lcd_: _quick, agile_, _Ph_:
_gentle_, _Wid_. II. n. _‘light,’ daylight_, _Æ, B, Bl, Chr, G, Ps, W_:
_power of vision_, _Bl_: _luminary_, _Lcd_. III. _luminous, bright_,
_‘light,’ clear, resplendent, beautiful_, _BH, Lcd, VPs_; AO, CP.

lēohtan = līhtan

lēohtbǣre _brilliant, luminous_.

lēohtbēamede _bright-shining_, ÆH 1·610.

lēohtberend m. _light-bearer, Lucifer_, Æ.

lēohtberende _light-bearing, luminous_, Æ.

lēohtbora m. _light-bearer_, LV 36.

lēohtbrǣdnes f. _levity, frivolity, wantonness_.

leohte = lehte, pret. 3 sg. of leccan.

lēohte I. adv. _lightly, easily, comfortably_, _BH_. [‘_light_’] II.
adv. _brightly, clearly, brilliantly_, _Bl, Cr_. [‘_light_’]

lēoht-fæt n. nap. -fatu _lantern, torch, lamp, light_, Æ, CP.

lēohtfætels m. _lamp_, #LPs# 17^29.

lēohtfruma † m. _source of light_.

lēoht-gesceot, -gescot n. _payment for providing lights in church_.

lēohtian I. _to be lightened, relieved_. II. _to become light, dawn_, CM
474: (†) _give light, illuminate_.

lēohting = līhting

lēohtīsern (ē^1, NG) n. _candlestick_.

lēohtlēas _devoid of light, dark_, _Æ_. [‘_lightless_’]

lēohtlic I. _light, of little weight or importance_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce
_lightly, slightly_, _BH, Lcd_: _inconsiderately_: _easily, quickly_:
_gently, softly, slowly_, _CP_; Æ. [‘_lightly_’] II. _bright, radiant_,
_Rd_.

leohtmōd _easy-going_, #GnE# 86.

leohtmōdnes f. _levity, inconstancy, frivolity_, CP.

lēohtsāwend _author of light_, GPH 389^2.

lēohtscēawigend _light-seeing_, WW 434^20.

lēohtsceot = lēohtgesceot

lēohtwyrhta = lēoðwyrhta

leolc pret. 3 sg. of lācan.

±lēoma m. _ray of light, beam, radiance, gleam, glare_, _B_; Æ:
_lightning_.

±lēoman, lēomian? _to shine_, SkED.  [[from first edition]]

+lēomod _having rays of light_, #Lcd# 3·272^4.

leomu nap. of lim.

lēon I. (sv^1) _to lend, grant_. [_Ger._ leihen] II. gdas. of lēo.

lēona mf. _lion, lioness_, Æ.

lēonesēað m. _lions’ den_, GD 150^9.

lēonflǣsc n. _lion’s flesh_, _Lcd_ 1·364. [v. ‘_lion_’]

lēonfōt m. _lion’s foot (plant)_.

lēonhwelp m. _lion’s cub_, WW 434^6.

±lēoran (wv., but rare pp. loren) _to go, depart, pass, vanish, die_
(A; v. JAW 44).

±lēorednes f. _departure, transmigration_: _death_, ÆL: _vision_.

lēorende, +lēorendlic _transitory_.

leornan = leornian

leornere m. _‘learner,’ disciple_, Æ, CP: _scholar_, _BH_: _reader_.

lēornes = lēorednes

±leornian _to ‘learn,’ read, study, think about_, _Æ, BH, MkR_; AO, CP.

leorningcild n., leorningcniht (Æ, CP) m. _student, disciple_.

leorningende _teachable_.

leorninghūs n. _school_, WW.

leornung f., ds. leornunga _‘learning,’ reading, study, meditation_,
CP; AO.

leornungcræft m. _learning_, #El# 380.

leornungmann m. _learner, disciple (used even of women)_, Æ.

leornungscōl f. _school_, GD 14^6.

leort pret. 3 sg. of lǣtan.

lēosca (ē) m. _groin_.

leoð = leoðu v. lið.

leoð- = lið-

lēoð n. _song, lay, poem_, _B, WW_; Æ, AO. [‘_leoth_’; _Ger._ lied]

lēoðcræft m. _poetic art or skill_: _poem, poetry_, Æ.

lēoðcræftig _skilled in song_, #Deor# 40.

lēoðcwide m. _lay, poem_, AO 120^2.

leoðe- = leoðu-

lēoðgidding f. _lay, song, poem_, #An# 1481.

lēoðian † _to sing, recite_: _sound forth, resound_.

lēoðlic _versified_, ÆH 2·134.

leoðo- = leoðu-

lēoðorūn f. _wise counsel given in song_, #El# 522.

lēoðowyrt = lēaðorwyrt?

lēoðrian = hlēoðrian

lēoðsang m. _song, poem, poetry_, BH.

leoðu I. f. _retinue, following_? #Rim# 14 (GK). II. v. lið.

leoðubend † mf. _chain, fetter, bond_.

leoðucǣge f. _limbs which served as a key_, #Cr# 334.

leoðucræft † m. _skill of hand_.

lēoðucræft = lēoðcræft

leoðucræftig _agile_, #Ph# 268.

leoðufæst _able, skilful_, #Cra# 95.

leoðulic _appertaining to the limbs, bodily_.

leoðusār n. _pain in the limbs_, WW 213^8.

leoðusyrce † f. _corslet_.

leoðuwāc (i) _with supple limbs, flexible, pliant_, _Cra_ 84.
[‘_leathwake_’]

leoðuwācian _to mitigate_.

leoðuwācunga (liðe-)? ‘_compeditorum_,’ #EPs# 78^11.

±leoðuwǣcan _to become pliant, be submissive, grow calm, soften_.

lēoðweorc n. _poetry_, WW 188^30.

lēoðwīse f. _verse, poetry_, Æ.

lēoðword n. _a word in a poem_, #An# 1490.

lēoðwrence m. _poem_, A 8·334.

lēoðwyrhta m. _poet_, #ÆGr#.

lēow (ǣu) n. _ham, thigh_.

-lēow (ē, ā) v. mund-l.

leowe f. _league (distance)_, WW 147^22.

lēower pl. of lēow.

lepewince = læpewince

leppan _to feed (a hawk)_, #Wy# 89 (v. ES 37·195).

lēran (#KGl#) = lǣran

lere (#KGl# 83^19) = lyre

lērēow- = lārēow-

lēs- = līes-

lesan^5 _to collect, pick, select, gather, glean_, Æ. [‘_lease_’; _Ger._
lesen]

lēsca = lēosca

-lesende, -lesendlic, -lesung v. ed-l.

lēst = lāst

lesu = lysu

lēsw- = lǣsw-

lēt I. pret. 3 sg. of lǣtan. II. = lǣt pres. 3 sg. of lǣdan. III. = lēat
pret. of lūtan.

lētan = lǣtan

lētanīa m. _litany_. [_L._ litania]

letig (#KGl#) = lytig

±lettan (æ) _to ‘let,’ hinder, delay, impede, oppress_, _Æ, Bo, Gu_
(w. g.), _W_; AO, CP.

lettend m. _hinderer_, ES 39·349.

letting (æ) f. _‘letting,’ hindrance, delay_, _RB_; CP.

lēð = lǣð

-leðer v. heals-, weald-l.

leðera = liðera  [[under “liðere”]]

leðercodd m. _leather bag_, _WW_ 117^3. [v. ‘_leather_’]

leðeren = leðren

leðerhelm m. _leathern helmet_, WW 142^1.

leðerhose f. _leathern gaiter_, WW.

leðern = leðren

leðerwyrhta m. _leather-maker, tanner, currier_, #Gl#.

lēðr- = lȳðr-

leðren (i) ‘_leathern_,’ _WW_.

lēud = (1) lēod; (2) lǣwede

lēw f? _weakness_, W 165^9 (cp. lēf I.).

+lēwed _weak, ill_? Æ (#Ex# 22^10, cp. limlǣweo or ? read +lēfed.

lēwend = lǣwend

lēwer = lēower

lēwsa m. _weakness_: ‘_inops_,’ #EPs# 139^13 (hlēw-). [lēf I.]

lex = leax

lēxnian (WW 241^21) = lācnian

lib- = lif-

libb- = lyb-

libban (y) pret. 3 sg. lif(e)de _to ‘live,’ be, exist_, _Æ, B, BH, Lcd,
VPs_; AO, CP.

libr- = lifer-

līc n. _body_, _B, Cr_: _corpse_, _AO, B_; Æ, CP. [‘_lich_’; _Ger._
leiche]

+līc adj. (w. d.) _‘alike,’ similar, equal_, _Mt_; Æ, CP. +līcost
_double, twin_.

+līca, +līce wk. forms used as sb. _an equal_, Æ, CP. adv. ±līce (usu.
+; and +līc in NG), _Bl_. +līce and _like as if_.

līcam- = līcham-

līcbeorg f. _coffin, sarcophagus_, Cp 45#s#.

+līcbisnung f. _imitation_, DR 76^1.

līcburg f. _cemetery_, Cp 433#c#.

liccere, liccetere = līcettere

liccettan (Æ) = līcettan

liccian _to ‘lick,’_ _Æ, Ps_: _lap, lick up_, _Lcd_.

liccung f. _licking_, ÆH 1·330^22.

līcema = līchama

līcendlic == līciendlic

līcettan _to feign, pretend, dissimulate_, CP: _flatter_, BH.

līcettere m. _deceiver, hypocrite_, CP.

līcettung, līcetung f. _feigning, deceit, hypocrisy, flattery_.

līcewyrðe = līcwyrðe

līcfæt † n. _body_.

licgan^5 (±) _to ‘lie,’ be situated, be at rest, remain, be_, _Ph_; Æ,
AO, CP: (±) _lie down, lie low, yield, subside, lie prostrate, fail, lie
dead_, _Æ, AO, B, Chr, G_: _lead, extend to_, _Æ_; AO: _flow, go, run_,
AO: _belong to_. l. for _take the part of_, LL 152[3]. l. mid _cohabit
with_. wið licgendum fēo _for ready money_.

līchama m. _body, corpse_, _Bo, Mt_; Æ, CP. [‘_licham_’; _Ger._
leichnam]

līchamlēas _incorporeal_, Æ.

līchamlic (o^2) _corporeal, bodily, carnal, material_, _Bo, Lk_; Æ. adv.
-līce _bodily, personally, in the flesh_, _BH_; Æ. [‘_lichamly_’]

+līchamod _incarnate_.

-līchamung v. in-l.  [[headword spelled “inlīchomung”]]

līchom- = līcham-

līchord † n. _interior of the body_.

līchrægel n. _winding-sheet_, MH 76^26.

līchryre m. _bodily decay, death_, #Gen# 1099.

līchryst = līcrest

līchwamlic = līchamlic

līcian (w. d. or impers.) _to please_, _Æ, Bl, Bo_; CP. [‘_like_’]

līciendlic _agreeable, pleasant_. adv. -līce.

+līclǣtan^7 _to liken, compare_, MkLR 4^30.

līclēoð n. _dirge_, OEG.

līclic _relating to the dead, funeral_, GPH 401.

+līclic _fitting, proper_. adv. -līce _equally_.

līcmann m. _bearer, pall-bearer_, Æ.

līcnes (±) f. _‘likeness’ (‘i-likeness’), figure, stature, image_, _Æ,
MtL_: (+) _parable_.

līcpytt m. _sepulchre, grave_, #ÆGr# 66^10? (or ? dīc, pytt).

līcrest f. _sepulchre, tomb_, Æ: _‘carrum,’ hearse_, ÆL 26^181.

līcs- = līx-

līcsang m. _dirge_, OEG.

līcsār † n. _wound_.

līcstōw f. _place of burial_, GD 340^35.

līcsyrce f. _corslet_, B 550.

līctūn m. _burial-ground_, Æ.

līcðēnung f. _obsequies, funeral_, Æ: _laying out (of corpse)_, ÆL
31^1429.

līcðēote f. _pore_, WW 159^13.

līcðrōwere m. _leper_, Æ.

līcðrūh f. _coffin_, GD.

līcum- = līcham-

±līcung f. _pleasure_, _CP_. [‘_liking_’]

līcwīglung f. _necromancy_, LL (248^3).

līcwund f. _wound_, #Ex# 239.

±līcwyrðe (e, eo, o, u) _pleasing, acceptable_, _Bo_; CP: _estimable,
praiseworthy_: _accepted, recognised, sterling_. [‘_likeworth_’]

līcwyrðlīce _pleasingly_, Æ.

līcwyrðnes f. _good pleasure_, #LPs# 88^18.

lid † n. _ship, vessel_. [līðan]

lida † m. _sailor_.

liden pp. of līðan.

līdeð pres. 3 sg. of lēodan.

lidmann † m. _seafarer, sailor, pirate_.

lidrin = leðren

lidweard m. _ship-master_, #An# 244.

lidwērig _weary of sea-voyages_, #An# 482.

līefan (ē, ī, ȳ) _to allow, grant, concede_, _Mt_ (ȳ), _CP_. [‘_leve_’;
lēaf]

±līefan (ē, ēo, ī, ȳ) tr. and intr. _to believe, trust, confide in_,
_Bl, MH_ (ȳ). [‘_leve_’]

+līefed (ȳ) _believing, faithful, pious_, Æ.

+līefedlic _permissible_, LL (436^30).

+līefedlīce _trustfully, credulously_, AO (ȳ).

+līefen _excused_, LkR 14^19 (ē).

+līefenscipe m. _justification_, JnLR 15^22.

līeffæstan = līffæstan

līeg (ǣ, ē, ī) mn. _fire, flame, lightning_, _B, Bl_ (ē); CP. [‘_leye_’]

līeget = līget

liegeð I. = legeð pres. 3 sg. of lecgan. II. pres. 3 sg. of licgan.

līeht- = lēoht-, līht-

līehð pres. 3 sg. of lēogan.

±līesan (ē, ȳ) _to loosen, release, deliver, liberate_, _Cr_ (ȳ), _LkR_
(ē). [‘_leese_’]

+līesednes (ȳ) f. _redemption_.

līesing I. (ī, ȳ) m. _freedman_, LL. II. f. _deliverance, release_, LkL
(ē). [‘_leesing_’]

+līesnes (ē, ī) f. _redemption_.

līeð- = līð-

līexan = līxan

līf I. n. _‘life,’ existence_, _Æ, B, Chr, JnL_: _lifetime_, _RB_. on
līfe, tō līfe, līfes _alive_, _BH_: _way of life (e.g. monastic)_, _BH,
Chr, Lk, W_; CP: _place where the life is according to fixed rules,
monastery_, #Chr#. II. = lēf. III. = lēaf I.

līf- = līef-

līfbrycgung f. _conversation, way of life_, DR 7^15.

līfbysig _struggling for life_, B 966.

līfcearu † f. _care about life_.

līfdæg m. nap. līfdagas (usu. in plur.) _‘life-day,’ lifetime_, _B, Cr_.

lifde, lifede pret. sg. of libban.

lifen f. _food, nourishment_.  [[from first edition]]

lifer I. f. ‘_liver_,’ _Bo, WW_; Æ. II. f. _a weight_, WW 432^28. [_L._
libra?]

liferādl f. _liver complaint_, #Lcd#, WW.

liferbȳl m. _protuberance of the liver_, #Lcd# 76b.

liferhol n. _hollow in the liver_, #Lcd# 76b.

liferlæppa m. _lobe of the liver_, WW.

liferwærc m. _pain in the liver_, #Lcd# 60a.

liferwyrt n. _liverwort_, ANS 84·326.

lifesn = lyfesn

līffadung f. _regulation of life_.

līffæc n. _lifetime, life_, LL, W.

±līffæst _living, quickened, full of life, vigorous_: _settled_.

±līffæstan _to quicken, endow with life_, Æ.

+līffæstnian _to quicken_, #RPs# 142^11.

liffet- = lyffet-

līffrēa † m. _Lord of life, God_.

līffruma † m. _source of life (God)_.

lifgan = libban

līfgedāl n. _death_, GD.

līfgesceaft † f. _life’s conditions or record_.

līfgetwinnan mp. _twins_, #Sol# 141.

lifian † (A) = libban

lifiende (y) _that lives or has life_, _BH_: _when alive_, _BH, VPs_: as
sb. _the ‘living,’_ _VHy_.

līflād f. _course of life, conduct_, _RB_. [‘_livelihood_’]

līflǣst = līflēast

līflēas _not endowed with life_, _‘lifeless,’ inanimate_, _Æ_: _dead_,
_Æ_.

līflēast f. _loss of life, annihilation, death_, Æ.

līflic _living_, _Æ_: _necessary to life, vital_, _Hex, DHy_. adv. -līce
_vitally, so as to impart life_, _Æ_. [‘_lively_’]

līflyre m. _loss of life_, LL 466[2].

līfneru f. _food, sustenance_, #An# 1091.

lifre gs. of lifer I.

lifre- = lifer-

lifrig _clotted_? A 30·132.

lift = lyft

līfweard m. _guardian of life_, #El# 1036.

līfweg m. _way of life, way in life_.

līfwela † m. _riches_.

līfwelle _living (of water)_, JnL 4^10.

līfwraðu † f. _protection of life_.

līfwynn † f. _enjoyment of life_.

līg (Æ) = līeg

lig- = lyg-

līgbǣre, līgberend _flaming_, #Gl#.

līgbryne † m. _burning, fire_.

līgbysig (ē) _busy with fire_, #Rd# 31^1.

līgcwalu f. _fiery torment_, #El# 296.

līgdraca (ē) † m. _fiery dragon_.

līgegesa m. _flaming terror_, B 2780.

līgen (ē) _flaming, fiery_, Æ.

ligenword = lygeword

+lig-er, -ere n., -ernes f. _concubinage, fornication, adultery_, AO.

līget nm., līgetu (ē) f. _lightning, flash of lightning_, _BH, Bl, Mt_;
Æ, AO. [‘_lait_’; līeg]

līgetræsc m. _lightning, flash of light, coruscation_, Lk 10^18. [līget]

līgetsleht (ē^1, æ^3) f. _lightning-stroke, thunder-bolt_.

līgetung f. _lightning_, EHy 6^41.

ligeð pres. 3 sg. of licgan.

līg-fǣmende, -fāmblāwende _vomiting fire_, BH 432^7.

līgfȳr n. _fire_, #Ex# 77.

ligge = līege ds. of līeg.

līgit = līget

līglic (ē) _fiery_, #Guth# 131^196.

līg-locc, -locced _having flaming locks_, WW.

līgnian = lȳgnian  [[headword spelled “lygnian”]]

līgræsc (ē^1, e^2) = līgetræsc

līg-ræscetung, -ræscung (ȳ^1) f. _lightning_.

līgspīwel _vomiting flame_.

ligð pres. 3 sg. of licgan.

līg-ðracu † f. gds. -ðræce _fiery onset, violence of flames_.

līgȳð f. _wave of fire_, B 2672.

līh imperat. sg. of lēon.

līht == lēoht

līhtan (ē, ēo, ȳ) I. (±) _to make _‘light_,’ easy, relieve, alleviate_,
_CP, Lcd, LL_: _dismount, ‘alight,’_ _BH_ (y). II. (ie, ȳ) _to lighten,
illuminate, give light, shine_, _Æ, Jn_ (ȳ): _grow light, dawn_, _Da_
(ȳ): ‘_light,’ kindle_.

līhting I. f. _relief, alleviation, release_, _LL_. [‘_lihting_’] II.
(ēo) f. _shining, illumination, light_, _Æ_: _dawn_: _lightning_.
[‘_lihting_’]

līhtingnes f. _lightness of taxation_, LL (306^21).

līhtnes f. _brightness_, _W_ 230^12. [‘_lightness_’]

līhð pres. 3 sg. of lēogan.

lilie f. ‘_lily_,’ _Bl, Lcd_; Æ. [_L._ lilium]

lim (y) n. nap. leomu _‘limb,’ member_, _Æ, BH, Bl_; AO, CP: _branch_,
_B_: _agent, offspring_? _Bl_, 33: _bone_? #CPs# 6^3.

līm m. _anything sticky_, _‘lime,’ mortar, cement, gluten_, _Ep, WW_.

+līman _to cement, join, stick together_.

limbstefning f. _hanging, curtain_, WW 191^32.

līmfīn f. _lime-heap_, BC 1·518^41.

limgelecg n. _shape_, WW.

limgesihð f. _body_, A 2·364.

limhāl _sound of limb_, #Gu# 661.

+līmian = +līman

līming f. _smearing, plastering_, _WW_. [‘_liming_’]

limlǣw f. _injury to the limbs, mutilation_, LL (278^26).

limlǣweo _maimed_, LL 132[10].

limlēas _without limbs_, Æ 2·270^22.

limmǣlum adv. _‘membratim,’ limb by limb_, _WW_. [‘_limbmeal_’]

limmlama _crippled_, W 4^12.

limnacod _stark naked_, #Gen# 1566.

+limp n. _occurrence_: _misfortune, accident_, CP.

±limpan^3 _to happen, occur_, _B, Bo, Chr, Met_; Æ, AO, CP: _belong to,
suit, befit_, _OET, Ct_: _concern_, CP. [‘_limp_,’ ‘_i-limp_’]

±limpful _fitting, convenient_, AS 2^1.

limplǣcan _to unite, connect_, OEG 80.

+limplic _fitting, suitable_, ÆL. adv. -līce (±).

+limplicnes f. _opportunity_.

limrǣden f. _cloak_? _form_? _disposition of the limbs_? v. OEG 2530.

limsēoc † _lame, paralytic_.

limwǣde n. _clothing_, #PPs# 103^2.

limwæstm m. _stature_, #Sat# 130.

limwērig _weary of limb_, #Rood# 63.

līn n. _flax, linen, cloth, napkin, towel_, _Gl, JnR, MtR_; CP.
[‘_line_’]

līnacer m. _flax field_, EC 239.

lind I. f. _lime-tree, linden_, _Gl_; Æ; Mdf: (†) _shield (of wood)_.
[‘_lind_’] II. = lynd

lindcroda ‡ m. _crash of shields, battle_.

linde _lime-tree, linden_.

linden _made of ‘linden’-wood_, _GnE_.

lindgecrod n. _shield-bearing troop_, #An# 1222.

lindgelāc n. _battle_, #Ap# 76.

lindgestealla † m. _shield-comrade, companion in war_.

lindhæbbende † m. _shield-bearer, warrior_.

lindplega † m. _shield-play, battle_.

lindrycg m. _ridge where limes grow_, KC 3·79^20.

lindwered n. _troop armed with shields_, #El# 142.

lindwiga m. _warrior_, B 2603.

lind-wīgend †, -wiggend † m. _shielded warrior_.

līne f. _line, cable, rope_, _Sol, WW_: _series, row_: _rule,
direction_.

līnece (WW 286^21) = līnete

līnen adj. _‘linen,’ made of flax_, _Ep_; Æ, CP.

līnenhrægl n. _linen cloth_, NG.

līnenwerd _dressed in linen_, LL (370^11).

līnete (-ece) f. _linnet_, WW 286^21.

līnet-wige, -wigle f. _linnet_, _Cp, Erf, WW_. [‘_lintwhite_’]

-ling suffix (1) for forming personal nouns (dēorling, rǣpling). (2) for
forming advbs. (hinderling).

līnhǣwen _flax-coloured_, #Lcd#.

līnland n. _land in flax_, KC 3·19^4.

līnlēag m. _flax ground_, EC 166.

linnan^3 (w. instr. or g.) _to cease from, desist, lose, yield up
(life)_, _B_. [‘_lin_’]

līnsǣd n. ‘_linseed_,’ _A_ (e^2), _Lcd_.

līnwǣd f. _linen cloth or garment_, NG.

līnwyrt f. _flax_, #Lcd#.

līo (WW 438^22) = lēo

lippa m., lippe? f. (LL 2·136) ‘_lip_,’ _Lcd, RB, WW_.

līra m. _any fleshy part of the body, muscle, calf of the leg_, WW.

+lire = +ligere  [[under “+liger”]]

līreht _fleshy_, #Lcd# 91a.

līs = liss

līs- = līes-

lisan (#Gl#) = lesan

+lise (e) nap. +leosu n. _reading, study_, BH.

+līsian _to slip, glide_, CP 437.

-lisnian, -listnian v. be-l.

liss (līðs) f. _grace, favour, love, kindness, mercy_, Æ: _joy, peace,
rest_, _Ph, W_: _remission, forgiveness_: _saving (of life)_. [‘_liss_’;
līðe]

līssian _to subdue_, #Sol# 294.

list mf. _art, cleverness, cunning, experience, skill, craft_, _Cr_.
[‘_list_’] listum _cunningly, skilfully_.

listan = lystan

līste f. _‘list,’ fringe, border_, _Ep_.

listelīce adv. _carefully_, #Lcd# 11a.

listhendig _skilful_, #Cra# 95.

listum v. list.

listwrenc m. _deception_, W 81; 128^9.

lisð pres. 3 sg. of lesan.

lit _colour, dye_, NC 306 (late).

līt = lȳt

lītan _to bend, incline_, #Met# 26^119.

lite- = lytig-

lītel = lȳtel

litig = lytig

litigere m. _dyer_, NC 306 (late).

lītl- = lȳtl-

litsmann = liðsmann

lið I. nm. nap. leoðu, liðu _limb, member_, _BH, Cr_; Æ, AO, CP:
_joint_, _Lcd_. [‘_lith_’] II. n. _fleet_. [_ON._ lið]

līð I. n. _cider, native wine, fermented drink_, CP: _beaker, cup_. II.
pres. 3 sg. of licgan. III. = līðe adj. IV. = līhð

līða m. _name of months June_ (ǣrra l.) _and July_ (æftera l.).

liðādl f. _gout_, #Lcd#, WW.

līðan^1 _to go, travel, sail_, _B, BH_. [‘_lithe_’]

līðe I. adj. _gentle, soft, calm, mild_, _ApT, B, Mt_; Æ, AO, CP:
_gracious, kind, agreeable, sweet_, _Bo, Gen_; Æ. [‘_lithe_’] II. adv.
_gently, softly_.

liðe- = leoðu-

liðebīge _flexible, yielding_, _Æ_. [‘_litheby_’]

liðebīgnes f. _flexibility of limbs_, #Guth# 90^21.

līðeg == līðig

līðelic _gentle, soft, mild_, CP. adv. -līce, _CP_. [‘_lithely_’]

+liðen (y) _having travelled much_. [līðan]

līðercian _to smooth down, flatter_, #Gl#.

liðere f., liðera m. _sling, slinging pouch_, _BH, Cp_; Æ. [‘_lither_’;
leðer]

liðeren = leðren

liðerlic _of a sling_, WW 247^4.

+liðewācian _to calm, appease, mitigate_, ÆL.

liðewǣcan = leoðuwǣcan

liðgeat = hlidgeat

līðian (_CP_; Æ) = līðigian

+liðian (eo) _to incline, accustom_, A 2·68.

līðig _lithe, flexible, bending, yielding_, _Æ, W_. [‘_lithy_’]

līðigian (±) _to soften, calm, assuage, appease_, _CP_; Æ: _be mild_.
[‘_lithe_’]

liðincel n. _little joint_, WW.

līðlic = līðelic

liðmann = lidmann

līðnes f. _mildness, softness, gentleness, kindness_, Æ, CP.

liðo- = leoðu-

liðre = liðere

līðre = lȳðre

liðrin = leðren

līðs = liss

liðsēaw n. _synovia_.

liðsmann m. _seafarer, pirate_, #Chr#.

liðu v. lið.

liðule m? _synovia_, #Lcd#. [lið, ele]

līðung f. _alleviation, relief_, #Lcd# 1·112^2.

līðwǣge n. _drinking-cup_, B 1982.

liðwærc m. _pain in the limbs_, #Lcd# 49b.

līðwyrde _mild of speech_, NC 348.

līðwyrt f. _dwarf elder_.

līxan _to shine, flash, glitter, gleam_.

līxende _splendidly_, LkL 16^19.

līxung f. _brilliance, brightness_, N.

-lō pl. -lōn v. mæst-, sceaft-l.  [[“mæastlō” under “mæstlōn”]]

lob (#Gl#) = lof

lobbe f. _spider_, _LPs_. [‘_lob_’]

loc I. n. _‘lock’ bolt, bar_, _Æ, BH_; AO: _enclosure, fold, prison,
stronghold_, CP: _bargain, agreement, settlement, conclusion_. [lūcan]
II. = locc I.

lōc, lōca interj. _look, see, look you_. l. hū _however_. l. hwænne,
hwonne _whenever_. spel l. hwænne mann wille _a discourse for any
occasion you please_, Æ. l. hwǣr _wherever_. l. hwǣðer _whichever_.
l. hwā, l. hwæt, _whoever, whatever_. l. hwylc _whichever_.

loca m. _enclosure, stronghold_.

lōca-hū v. lōc interj.

locbore f. _one who wears long hair, free woman_, LL 7[73].

locc I. m. _‘lock’ of (hair)_, _hair, curl_, _Bl, CP, Ep_; Æ. II. =
loc I.

loccad ‘_crinitus_,’ OEG 56^13.

loccetan (MtL) ?= rocettan (JAW 77).

±loccian _to attract, entice, soothe_, CP.

locen I. pp. of lūcan. II. (#Sat# 300?) = loc

locer = locor

locfeax n. _hair_, WW 379^42.

locgewind n. _hair_, WW 199^7.

lōc-hū, -hwænne etc. v. lōc hū, lōc hwænne, etc.

lochyrdel m. _sheepfold_, LL 454[9].

lōcian (±) _to see, behold, look, gaze_, _Æ, Bl, CP, Mt_; AO: _observe,
notice, take heed_, _Bl_; Æ. l. tō _regard with favour_, _CP_: _belong,
pertain_, Æ.

locor _plane_, #Gl#.

locstān m. _keystone_, ÆL 23^345.

-lōcung v. ðurh-l.

loddere m. _beggar_, Æ; Mdf. [lȳðre]

+lodr f. _backbone, spine_, #Lcd# 65a.

lodrung f. _rubbish, nonsense_, WW 478^8.

+lodwyrt f. _silverweed_.

loerge (Ep) np. of lorg.

lof I. n. (m. _B_ 1536) _praise, glory, repute_, _Cp_; Æ, CP: _song of
praise, hymn_. [‘_lof_’] II. † n. _protection, help_.

lōf (OEG 5241) = glōf (?), v. ES 37·186.

lofbǣre _praising, giving praise_.

lofdǣd f. _praiseworthy deed_, B 24.

lofgeorn _eager for praise_, ÆL 16^302: _lavish_? RB 54^9; 55^3.

lofherung f. _praising_, #LPs# 55^12.

lofian _to praise, exalt_, _Gen, PPs_; CP: _appraise, value_. [‘_love_’]

loflāc n. _offering in honour of any one_, W 107^6.

loflǣcan _to praise_, #LPs# 118^175.

loflic _laudable_. adv. -līce _gloriously_.

lofmægen n. _praise_, #PPs# 105^2.

lofsang m. _song of praise, canticle, hymn, psalm_, _BH_; Æ: _lauds_.
[‘_lofsang_’]

lofsealm m. _the 148th Psalm_, RB 36^19.

lofsingende _singing hymns of praise_, OEG 4912.

lofsum _praiseworthy_, #Gen# 468.

lofte (on) adv. phr. _in the air, aloft_, _Hex, MLN_. [‘_loft_’]

lofung f. _praising, laudation_: _appraising_, Æ.

lōg pret. 3 sg. of lēan.

-loga v. āð-, trēow-, word-l. [leogan]  [[headword spelled “lēogan”]]

lōges v. lōh.

logeðer = logðer

±lōgian _to lodge, place, put by_, Æ: _put in order, arrange_, Æ:
_discourse_, Æ: _divide, portion out_. +l. ūp _lay by, deposit_. +logod
sprǣc (_well_)-_ordered speech, style_.

logðer (o^2) _cunning, artful_, WW.

+logung f. _order_, CM 599.

lōh I. n., gs. lōges _place, stead_ (only in phr. on his lōh). II. pret.
3 sg. of lēan II.

lōhsceaft m. _bolt, bar_? AS 1^2.

loma = lama

±lōma m. _tool, utensil, article of furniture_, _BH_; #Gl#. [‘_loom_’]

lomb, lomber = lamb

±lōme (1) adj. _frequent_, ÆL 31^1019; (2) adv. _often, frequently_. oft
(and) +l. _constantly, diligently_.

+lōmed = +lēomod

lōmelic = lōmlic

±lōmlǣcan _to frequent_, Æ: _be frequent_.

+lōmlǣcende _frequent_, Æ: _frequentative_ (vb), #ÆGr# 213^7.

+lōmlǣcing f. _frequency, frequenting_, #ÆGr# 213^7.

+lōmlic _repeated_, AO, CP. adv. -līce _frequently_.

+lōmlīcian _to become frequent_, #Bl# 109^2.

+lōmlicnes f. _frequented place_? _frequency_? #CPs# 117^27.

lomp pret. 3 sg. of limpan.

lond == land

londādl f. _strangury_? #Lcd# 108a. [hland]

lone = lane

long == lang

Longbeard-an, -as sbmpl. _Lombards_, AO.

lonn = lann

lonu = lanu

loppe f. _flea_ (_spider_? _silkworm_?), _Bo, WW_. [‘_lop_’]

loppestre f. ‘_lobster_,’ _WW_; Æ: _locust_.

lopust, lopystre = loppestre

lor n. (only in phr. tō lore, tō lose) _loss, destruction_, _Bl_; CP.
[‘_lor_’]

-lora v. hlēow-l.

loren pp. (str.) of lēoran.

lorg, lorh fm. _pole, distaff, weaver’s beam_, #Gl#.

los = lor [‘_loss_’]

losewist = loswist  [[under “losing”]]

losian (u) wv. (±) _to be lost, perish_, _Bo, CP_; Æ: (±) _escape, get
away_: ‘_lose_,’ _LkL_ 15^4: _destroy_, _LkL_ 7^27.

losigendlic _ready to perish_, Æ.

losing, loswist f. _perdition, loss, destruction_, NG.

lot n. _fraud, guile_, ÆL, CP.

loten pp. of lūtan.

lotwrenc m. _deception, deceit, cunning, artifice, trick_, Æ, AO, CP.

loða m. _upper garment, mantle, cloak_, CP.

lox m. _lynx_, BH, WW. [_Ger._ luchs]

luba-, lube- = lufe-

lūcan^2 I. (±) (tr.) _to lock, close, enclose, fasten, shut up_, _An_:
(intr.) _close up, form one mass_, _Ph_: _interlock, intertwine, twist,
wind_, CP: _conclude_. [‘_louk_’] II. _pluck out, pull up_, _Met_.
[‘_louk_’^2]

ludgæt n. _side-gate, postern gate_, #Gl#.

ludon pret. pl. of lēodan.

lufelic = luflic

lufen f. _hope_? (BT; GK), #Da# 73, B 2886.

lufestice f. _‘lovage’ (plant)_, _Lcd_. [_L._ levisticum]

lufestre f. _female lover_, OEG.

luffendlic = lufiendlic

±lufian _to ‘love,’ cherish, show love to_, _Æ, JnL, VPs_; CP: _fondle,
caress_: _approve, practise_.

lufiend m. _lover_, Æ.

lufiende _affectionate_, _ÆGr_. [‘_loving_’]

lufiendlic, lufigendlic _lovely, beautiful_, Æ: _lovable, amiable_, Æ.

luflic _amiable, loving_, _Lcd_: _lovable_, _Ps_. adv. -līce _lovingly,
kindly_, _CP_: _willingly, gladly_, _BH_. [‘_lovely_’]

lufrǣden f. _love_, _LPs_. [‘_lovered_’]

lufsum _loving, lovable, pleasant_, _Cr_. [‘_lovesome_’] adv. -līce
_graciously_.

lufsumnes f. _pleasantness, kindness_, #Gl#.

luftācen n. ‘_love-token_,’ _B_ 1863.

luf-tȳme (Æ), -tēme (RB) _pleasant, sweet, grateful, benevolent_.

luftȳmlic _embracing_, OEG 56^254.

lufu f. _love, strong liking, affection, favour_, _Æ, BH, Jn, VPs, WW_;
AO, CP: _love (of God)_, _JnR_: _amicable settlement_, _LL_ 392´.

lufwende _lovable, pleasant_.

lufwendlic _friendly_, #KGl# 73^34. adv. -līce _gently_, #KGl# 80^21.

lugon pret. pl. of lēogan.

luh n. _loch, pond_, NG; Mdf. [_Keltic_]

+lumpenlic _occasional_. [limpan]

lumpon pret. pl. of limpan.

luncian _to limp_? #LPs# 17^46. [cp. _Norw._ lunke?]

lundlaga m. _kidney_, Æ.

lungen f. ‘_lung_,’ _Lcd, WW_.

lungenādl f. _lung-disease_, #Lcd#.

lungensealf f. _lung-salve_, #Lcd# 141a.

lungenwyrt f. ‘_lung-wort_,’ _Lcd_.

-lunger v. cēas-l.

lungre † adv. _soon, forthwith, suddenly, quickly_.

lunnon pret. pl. of linnan.

lūpe f. _loop, leash_, #Gl#.

lūs f. nap. lȳs ‘_louse_,’ _Æ, Cp, Hex_.

lusian (GPH) = losian

lust I. m. _desire, appetite_, _Æ, BH, JnL_: _pleasure_, _Bo, Lk_ (pl.):
_sensuous appetite, lust_, _Jul, Lcd, WW_. II. adj. _willing_, W 246^10.

lustbǣre _desirable, pleasant, agreeable, cheerful, joyous_, Æ, AO:
_desirous_, ÆL 4^116.

lustbǣrlic _pleasant_, AO. adv. -līce.

lustbǣrnes f. _enjoyment, pleasure, desire_, CP.

lustful _wishful, desirous_, _AO_ 100^27. [‘_lustfull_’]

±lustfullian _to rejoice, enjoy_, Æ: _be pleasing to_, CP 70^24.

±lustfullīce _joyfully, gladly, heartily_, _Bl_. [‘_lustfully_’]

±lustfullung f. _desire, pleasure_, Æ.

±lustfulnes f. _desire, pleasure_, _BH_; CP. [‘_lustfulness_’]

lustgeornnes f. _concupiscence_, G.

lustgryn f. _snare of pleasure_, #Soul# 23.

lustlīce _willingly, gladly_, _Bl_; Æ, AO.

lustmoce f. _lady’s-smock (plant)_, #Lcd#.

lustsumlic _pleasant_. adv. -līce _willingly_.

lustum adv. _with pleasure, gladly_.

lūsðorn m. _spindle-tree_, EC 445^31.

±lūtan^2 _to bend, stoop, decline_, Æ, AO: +loten dæg _after part of
day_: _bow, make obeisance, fall down_, _Bl, VPs_: (+) _lay down_, MtL
8^20: _entreat_. [‘_lout_’]

±lūtian _to lie hid, hide, lurk_, _Æ, VHy_; AO, CP. [‘_lout_’^2]

lutter = hluttor  [[under “hlūtor”]]

luttor = hlūtor

lūðer- = lȳðer-

lybb n. _drug_, _poison, charm_: _witchcraft_.

lybban = libban

lybbestre f. _sorceress_, WW 200^25.

lybcorn n. _a medicinal seed, wild saffron_? #Gl#.

lybcræft m. _skill in the use of drugs, magic, witchcraft_, #Bl#.

lybesn = lyfesn

lyblāc nm. _occult art, use of drugs for magic, witchcraft_.

lyblǣca m. _wizard, sorcerer_, #Gl#.

lybsin, lybsn = lyfesn

lȳc- = lǣc-, līc-

lycce = lyge II.

lȳcð pres. 3 sg. of lūcan.

lȳden (LWS) = lǣden

lȳf = līf

lȳf- = lēaf-, lēf-, līef-, līf-

lyfde, lyfede pret. 3 sg. of libban.

lyfesn (i) f. _charm, amulet, knot_.

lyffetere m. _flatterer_, Æ.

lyffet-tan, -tian _to flatter_, Æ.

lyffetung f. _adulation, flattery_, Æ.

lyfian = lifian, libban

lyft fmn. _air, sky, clouds, atmosphere_, _B, Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP. on lyfte
_on high, aloft_. [‘_lift_’; _Ger._ luft]

lyftādl f. _paralysis, palsy_, BH, #Lcd#.

lyftedor m. _clouds_, #Ex# 251.

lyften _of the air, aërial_, Æ.

lyftfæt n. _vessel in the air (moon)_, #Rd# 30^3.

lyftflēogend m. _flier in the air, bird_, #Sol# 289.

lyftfloga m. _flier in the air, dragon_, B 2315.

lyftgelāc † n. _flight through the air_.

lyftgeswenced _driven by the wind_, B 1913.

lyfthelm † m. _air, mist, cloud_.

lyftlācende † _sporting in the air, flying_.

lyftlic _aërial_, NC 314.

lyftsceaða m. _aërial robber (raven)_, #Wy# 39.

lyftwundor n. _aërial wonder_, #Ex# 90.

lyftwynn † f. _pleasure in flying_.

lyge I. (i) m. _‘lie,’ falsehood_, _BH, Sat_. II. _lying, false_ (A; =
*lygge, JAW 25). III. _‘sicalia,’ secale_? _corn_? _rye_? WW 301^2.

lygen (i) f. _lie, falsehood_.

lygenian = lygnian

lygesearu † n. _lying wile, trick_.

lygespell (i) n. _falsehood_, WW 449^2.

lygesynnig (i) _lying, false_, #El# 899.

lygetorn (i) _feigned anger or grief_, B 1943.

lygeword (i) † n. _lying word, lie_.

lygewyrhta (i) m. _liar_, #Leas#.

lygnes (i) f. _falseness_: _false things_.

±lygnian (i) _to give one the lie, convict of falsehood_, Æ.

+lygnod _perjured_, Æ (i).

  [[Printed inline, as continuation of “lygnian” entry.]]

lȳht- = līht-

lyhð pres. 3 sg. of lēan.

lȳhð pres. 3 sg. of lēogan.

lym = lim

lȳman = lēoman

lymp- = limp-

±lynd (i) f. _fat, grease_.

+lyndu np. _joints of the spine_, WW 159^22.

lynibor n. _borer, gimlet_, WW 273^13.

lynis m. _axle, axletree, ‘linch’-pin_, _Ep, WW_.

lypenwyrhta m. _tanner_? v. JGPh 5·467.

lyre (e) m. _loss, destruction, damage, hurt_, _WW_; Æ. [‘_lure_’;
lēosan]

lyrewrenc m. _hurtful intrigue_, MFH 169.

-lyrtan v. be-l.

lȳs v. lūs.

lȳs- = līes-

lysferht = leasferhð  [[headword spelled “lēasferhð”]]

lysnan = hlysnan

lysnere = hlysnere

lȳssa (#KGl#) = lǣssa

lyssen = lyswen

±lystan impers. w. a. (d.) of pers. and g. of thing or inf. _to please,
cause pleasure or desire, provoke longing_, _Æ, Bl, Bo_; AO, CP. +lysted
_desirous of_. [‘_list_’; lust]

lystere (OEG 4674) = ? lyftere, lyffetere

+lystfullīce = lustfullīce

lysu I. _base, false, evil_. II. n. _evil deed_.

lyswen I. _purulent, corrupt_, #Lcd#. II. n. _pus, matter_, #Lcd#.

lȳt adv., adj. and indecl. sb. _little, few_, _B, DD, Gen, Run_; Æ, AO.

lȳtan = lūtan

lyteg == lytig

lȳtel I. adj. _‘little,’ not large_, _Æ, AO, Lk, Met_: _short (distance,
time)_, _B_: _not much_, _Mt, Ps_. II. adv. _little, slightly_, _Ps_.
III. sb. _AO, Lcd, Ps_.

lȳtelhȳdig _pusillanimous_, #Cra# 10.

lytelic = lytiglic

lytelīce = lytiglīce

lȳtelmōd _pusillanimous_, CP.

lȳtelne = lȳtesne  [[under “lȳtesnā”]]

lȳtelnes f. _smallness_, _ÆGr_ 228^14. [‘_littleness_’]

lȳtesnā, lȳtes(t)ne adv. _nearly, within a little, almost_.

lȳthwōn adv. and sb. (w. g.) _little, but little, very few_, Æ, CP.

lytig (e) _crafty, cunning_, AO.

lytigian _to feign, act crookedly_, #Ma# 86.

lytiglic (lytelic) _deceitful, crafty_. adv. -līce, CP.

lytignes f. _cunning_, CP.

±lȳtlian _to lessen, decrease, diminish_, _Bo, JnL_; CP: _shorten,
curtail, abrogate_: _fall out of use_, LL 267[37]. [‘_little_’]

lȳtling m. _little one, infant, child_, Æ, CP.

lȳtlum adv. (d. of lȳtel) _little by little, gradually_, _Æ_; CP.
[‘_litlum_’]

+lȳtlung (ī) f. _insufficiency, want_, #Sc# 57^1 (cp. EHy 5^12).

lyttl- = lȳtl-

lyttuccas mpl. _particles, small pieces_, GPH 400.

lyð = lið

lȳða = līða

+lyðen = +liðen

lȳðerful _evil, vile_, W 40^5.

lȳðerlic _bad, sordid, mean, vile_, AO. adv. -līce (ū^1).

lȳðernes (ū^1) f. _wickedness_, HL 18^8.

lȳðran (ē) _to anoint, smear, ‘lather,’_ _JnL_ (e), _Lcd_. [lēaðor]

lyðre = liðere

lȳðre I. (ē, ī) adj. _bad, wicked, base, mean, corrupt, wretched_, _Æ,
AO, Lk, WW_. [‘_lither_’] adv. _wretchedly, badly_, #Sat# 62. II. comp.
of līðe.

lȳðwyrt = līðwyrt

lȳxan = līxan




=M=


mā I. adv. [comp. of micle] _more, rather, longer, hereafter, further_,
_Æ, BH, Bo, Bl, CP, VPs_ (mǣ). ðe mā ðe _more than_. II. sb. (indecl.)
_more_, _Æ, An, BH, Bl_. III. adj. _more_, _Æ, Bl_. [‘_mo_’]

mabuldor = mapulder

maca = +mæcca

macalic _convenient_, MkR 6^21.

macian _to ‘make,’ form, construct, do_, _A, Æ_: _prepare, arrange,
cause_, _Æ, Gen, Mt_: _use_, _Æ_: _behave, fare_, _Æ, Bo_; CP. macian ūp
_to put up_, Æ.

mācræftig (= mægencr-) † _mighty_.

macung f. _making, doing_, #Chr# 1101.

+mād = +mǣd

mādm == māðm

mādmōd n. _foolishness_, #Mod# 25.

mǣ = mā

±mæc _well-suited, companionable_: _similar, equal_.

mæcan = mecgan, mengan

+mæcca (a, e) mf. _mate, equal, one of a pair, comrade, companion_,
_ÆGr_ (a), _MtR_ (e): (±) _husband, wife_, _Æ, Mt, OET_. [‘_match_’]

mǣcefisc = mēcefisc

mæcg † m. _man, disciple_: _son_.

mæcga m. _man_, Wy 52.

mæcian = mecgan, mengan

+mæclic _conjugal_, #Sc#.

+mæcnes f. _cohabitation_, BH.

+mæcscipe m. _cohabitation_, #Cr# 199.

mǣd (ē) f. ds. (EWS) mēda; nap. mǣd(w)a, mǣdwe _‘mead_,’ ‘_meadow,’
pasture_, _BC, OEG_; Æ, AO; Mdf.

+mǣd, +mǣded ‘_mad_,’ _Rd, WW_: _foolish_, _Cp_.

mæddre f. ‘_madder_,’ _Lcd_; Æ.

+mǣded = +mǣd

mǣden (Æ, AO, CP) == mægden

mǣdencild n. _female child, girl_, _AO_; Æ. [‘_maiden-child_’]

mǣdenhēap m. _band of virgins_, DD 289.

mǣdenlic _maidenly, virgin_, Æ.

mædere = mæddre

mæderecīð m. _sprig of madder_, #Lcd#.

+mædla m. _chatter_, #Lcd# 122b. [mæðel]

mǣdland m. _meadow-land_, KC.

mǣdmǣwect (= -wett) _mowing of a meadow_, LL 448[5,2].

mǣdrǣden f. _mowing, tract of mown grass_, KC 6·153^10.

mǣdsplott m. _plot of meadow-land_, KC 4·72^7.

mædwa m., mǣdwe f. = mǣd

mǣdweland = mǣdland

mæg I. pres. 3 sg. of magan. II. (#Sc# 4^19: 12^17) = mægen

+mǣg I. m. nap. māgas (v. LL 2·651) _male kinsman, parent, son, brother,
nephew, cousin_, _B, Ep_ (ē); Æ, AO, CP: [‘_may_’] II. † f. _female
relation, wife, woman, maiden_.

mǣgbana m. _destroyer of kinsfolk_, W 242^5.

mǣgbōt f. _compensation paid to the relatives of a murdered man_, LL.

mǣgburg f. _family, tribe, race, people, nation_: _genealogy_.

mǣgcild n. _young kinsman_.

mǣgcnafa m. _youthful kinsman_, BC 2·329´.

mǣgcūð _related_, OEG.

mǣgcwalm m. _murder of a relation_, Cp 179#p# (ē).

mægden (ǣd) n. _maiden, virgin_, _LL_; Æ: _girl_, _Mt_: _maid, servant_,
_Bl_.

mægden- see also mǣden-.

mægdenǣw f. _marriage with a virgin_.

mægdenhād m. _‘maidenhood,’ virginity_, _Cr_; CP.

mægdenmann m. _‘maid,’ virgin_, _AO_. [‘_maidenman_’]

mǣge = māge

mægen I. (e) n. _bodily strength, might_, _‘main’ force, power, vigour,
valour_, _B_; Æ, CP: _virtue, efficacy, efficiency_, _Lcd_: _picked men
of a nation, troop, army_, AO: _miracle_. [magan] II. subj. pl. of
magan.

mægenāgende _mighty_, B 2837.

mægenbyrðen † f. _huge burden_.

mægencorðor n. _strong troop_, #Gen# 1986.

mægencræft † m. _main force, great strength, might_.

mægencyning † m. _mighty king_.

mægendǣd f. _mighty deed_, #Cra# 12.

mægenēaca m. _succour_, #Az# 138.

mægenēacen † _mighty, vigorous_.

mægenearfeðe † n. _great misery or trial_.

mægenellen n. _mighty valour_, B 659.

mægenfæst _vigorous, strong, steadfast_, Æ.

mægenfolc n. _mighty company_, #Cr# 877.

mægenfultum m. _mighty help_, B 1455.

mægenhēap † m. _powerful band_.

mægenheard _very strong_, #Run# 5.

mægenian (gn-) _to gain strength_: (+) _establish, confirm_, BH 306^18.

mægenlēas _powerless, feeble, helpless_, _WW_; Æ. [‘_mainless_’] adv.
-līce.

mægenlēast f. _weakness, feebleness_, Æ: _inability_, RB.

mægenrǣs m. _mighty onslaught_, B 1519.

mægenrōf † _powerful_.

mægenscype m. _might, power_, #Da# 20.

mægenspēd f. _power, virtue_.

mægenstān m. _huge stone_, #Met# 5^16.

mægenstrang † _of great virtue or strength_.

mægen-strengo, -strengðu f. _main strength, great might_.

mægenðegen m. _mighty minister_, #Gu# 1099.

mægenðise f. _violence, force_, #Rd# 28^10.

mægenðrēat † m. _mighty host_.

mægenðrymm m. _power, might, greatness, glory_, Æ, CP: _heavenly host_:
(†) _Christ_: (†) _heaven_.

mægenðrymnes f. _great glory, majesty_, Æ.

mægenweorc † n. _mighty work_.

mægenwīsa m. _general_, #Ex# 553.

mægenwudu m. _strong spear_, B 236.

mægenwundor n. _striking wonder_, #Cr# 927.

mæger _meagre, lean_, #Lcd# 90b.

mægerian _to macerate, make lean_, WW. [_Ger._ magern]

mægester = magister

mægeð = mægð

mǣgeð = mǣgð

mǣggemōt n. _meeting of kinsmen_, AO 248^18.

mǣggewrit n. _genealogy, pedigree_.

mǣggieldan^3? _to contribute towards the fine for manslaughter by a
kinsman_, LL 122[74,2].

mǣghǣmed n. _incest_, BH 280^1.

mǣghand (mēg-, mēi-) f. _natural heir, relative_.

mægister = magister

mǣglagu f. _law as to relatives_, LL 266[25].

mǣglēas _without relatives_, LL.

mǣglic _belonging to a kinsman_, Æ.

mǣglufu f. _love_, #Jul# 70.

mǣgmorðor n. _murder of a relative_, #Gl#.

mǣgmyrðra m. _murderer of a relative, parricide_, OEG, GD 239^4.

mægn == mægen

mægnan = mengan

mægon = magon pres. pl. of magan.

mǣgracu f. _generation, genealogy_, Æ.

mǣgrǣden f. _relationship_, AO.

mǣgrǣs m. _attack on relatives_, W 164^4.

mǣgscīr [mēg-] f. _division of a people containing the kinsmen of a
particular family_ (BT), DR 193^10.

mǣgsibb f. _relationship_: _affection of relatives_.

mǣgsibbung f. _reconciliation, peace-making_, JGPh 1·63.

mǣgsiblic _related_, WW 375^17.

mǣgslaga m. _slayer of a relative, parricide, fratricide_, Æ.

mǣgsliht m. _murder of a relative_, W 130^2.

mægster = magister

mægð † I. f. gp. mægða, dp. mægðum, otherwise uninflected _maiden,
virgin, girl, woman, wife_. [_Goth._ magaðs] II. (±) f. _power,
greatness_.

mǣgð (ȳ) f. _family group, clan, tribe, generation, stock, race,
people_, Æ, AO: _province, country_, Æ.

mægða m. _mayweed_.

mægðblæd (geð) n. _pudendum muliebre_, GPH 400^8.

mægðbōt f. _fine for assault on an unmarried woman_? LL 7[74].

mægðe f. _mayweed_. [cp. mægða]

mægðhād m. _virginity, chastity, purity_, _MH_; Æ, CP: _band of young
persons_. [‘_maidhood_’]

mǣgðhād m. _relationship_, Æ.

mægðhādlic _maidenly_, OEG 1469.

mægðlagu = mæglagu  [[headword spelled “mǣglagu”]]

mǣgðlēas _not of noble birth_, WW 219^8.

mægðmann m. _maiden, virgin_, LL 8[82].

mǣgðmorðor (ē^1) nm. _murder of kin_, OEG 2^412.

mǣgðmyrðra m. _murderer of kin_, OEG 2^335.

mǣgðrǣden f. _friendship_, OEG.

mǣgðsibb (y^2) f. _kindred_, #HGl# 523.

mǣgwine † m. _friendly relative, clansman_.

mǣgwlite (ā, ē) m. _aspect, appearance, species, form_.

mǣgwlitian [mēg-] _to fashion_, MtL 17^2.

mǣgwlitlice [mēg-] _figuratively_, MkL p4^10.

mæht == meaht, miht

mæhð = mægð

mǣl I. (ā, ē) n. _mark, sign, ornament_: _cross, crucifix_: _armour,
harness, sword_: _measure_, _Lcd_: (†) _time, point of time, occasion,
season_: _time for eating_, _‘meal,’ meals_, _CP_; Æ. II. f. (†) _talk,
conversation_: _contest, battle_. [mæðel] III. = māl

+mǣl _stained, dyed_, #An# 1333.

+mǣlan _to mark, stain_, #Jul# 591.

±mǣlan † _to speak, talk_, _Gen_. [‘_i-mele_’; mæðlan]

mǣlcearu f. _trouble of the time_, B 189.

mæld- = meld-

mǣldæg † m. _appointed time, day_.

mǣldropa m. _phlegm, saliva_, WW 240^9.

mǣldropiende _phlegmatic_, WW 161^33.

mǣle m. _cup, bowl, bucket_, _Ep_; #Lcd# (ē). [‘_meal_’]

mǣlgesceaft f. _fate_, B 2737.

mǣlsceafa (æ?) m. _canker, caterpillar_, _WW_. [‘_malshave_’]

mæltan (#VPs#) = meltan

mǣl-tang m., -tange f. _pair of compasses_, WW.

mǣl-tīd f., tīma m. _mealtime_, NC 348.

mæn = menn nap. of man.

mæn- = man-, men-

±mǣnan (ē) _to ‘mean,’ signify, intend_, _Æ, Bo, Sol_; CP: _mention,
relate, declare, communicate to, speak of_, _B_: _associate (something)
with_, AO: _complain of, lament, bewail, sorrow, grieve_, _Bo_; Æ,
AO, CP.

mǣne I. (±, usu. +) _common, general, universal_, _Mt, WW_; Æ, AO, CP.
[‘_i-mene_’] II. (+) n. _fellowship, intercourse_. III. _false, mean,
wicked_. [mān] IV. (+) _subdued, overpowered_. [= *+mægne, ES 43·308]

±mǣnelic (usu. +) _common, mutual, general, universal_, Æ. adv. -līce.

+mǣnelicnes f. ‘_generalitas_,’ OEG.

mænibrǣde _relating to many things_, WW 115^8.

mǣnlic = mǣnelic

+mǣnnes f. _community, fellowship, intercourse, union_, _Shr_: _land
held in common_, BC 1·597´. [v. ‘_i-mene_’]

+mǣnscipe m. _community, fellowship_: _union_, W 248^23.

±mǣnsumian _to participate in, have fellowship with_: _live with,
marry_: _partake of Eucharist_, Æ.

±mǣnsum-nes, -ung f. _fellowship, participation_, Æ.

mænu = menigu

mǣrāc f. _boundary-oak_, KC 3·379^29.

mǣran (ā) I. (±) _to declare, proclaim, celebrate, glorify, honour_. II.
(+) _to determine, fix limits_, #Wid# 42.

mǣrapeldre f. _apple-tree forming part of a boundary_, KC 3·390^5.

mǣrbrōc m. _boundary-brook_, KC.

mærc (1) == mearc; (2) = mearg

mǣrcnoll m. _boundary-knoll_, EC 445.

mǣrdīc f. _boundary-dyke_, KC.

mære = (1) mare; (2) mere I.

mǣre I. (ē) _famous, great, excellent, sublime, splendid_, Æ, AO, CP.
[cp. _Ger._ märe, märchen] II. _pure, sterling (of money)_. [v. ‘_mere_’
adj.] III. (±, usu. +) _boundary, border_, _Mk, VPs_; Mdf.
[‘_mere_’ sb.]

mǣrelsrāp m. _ship’s rope, cable_, WW.

mæretorht = meretorht

mærgen = morgen

mærh (_Cp, Ep_) = mearg

mærh- = mearh-

  [[Printed on one line:
  mærh (_Cp, Ep_), mærh- = mearg, mearh-]]

mǣr-hege, -haga, -hege m. _boundary-hedge_, EC 447.

mǣrhlīsa m. _notoriety_, WW 382^10.

mǣrian _to be distinguished_, DHy.

mæringcwudu n. _mastic of sweet basil_? #Lcd# 131a.

+mǣrlacu f. _boundary stream_, EC 387.

mǣrlic (ȳ) _great, splendid, glorious, famous_, Æ, AO, CP. adv.
-līce, Æ.

mǣrnes f. _greatness, honour, fame_.

mǣrpul m. _boundary-pool_, EC 445.

mǣrpytt m. _pit that forms part of a boundary_ (BT), KC.

mærsc = mersc

mǣrsere (ē) m. _herald_, DR 56^17.

±mǣrsian (ē) I. _to make famous, celebrate, proclaim, declare,
announce_, Æ, CP: _celebrate_: _glorify, honour, exalt, praise_, Æ:
_spread (of fame)_: _enlarge_. II. _to mark out, bound, limit_.

mǣrstān m. _boundary stone_, _BC_. [‘_mere-stone_’]

mǣrsung (ē) f. _fame, report, renown_: _celebration, festival_, Æ:
_exalting, magnifying_: (±) _magnificence, celebrity_.

mǣrsungtīma m. _time of glorifying_, ÆH 2·360^25.

mærð = mearð

mǣrð f. _glory, repute, fame_: _famous exploit, glorious achievement_,
Æ, AO, CP.

mǣrðorn m. _boundary-hawthorn_, KC.

mǣrðu = mǣrð

mǣrðum (instr. of mǣrð) adv. _gloriously_.

mæru = mearu

+mǣrung? ‘_consummatio_,’ RHy 5^10.

mærw- = mearu-

±mǣrweg m. _boundary road_, Ct.

mǣrweorc m. _noble work_, #PPs# 110^4.

mǣrwyll m. _boundary stream_.

mæscre (ǣ?) f. _mesh_, WW 450^10.

mæsen _brazen_ (Earle); _of maple_ (BT), EC 250.

mæslere m. _sacristan_, GD.

mæsling, mæslen (_MkL_) = mæstling

mæssanhacele = mæssehacele

mæsse (e) f. ‘_mass_,’ _Eucharist, celebration of Eucharist_, _Æ, BH,
OET_; CP: _special mass day, festival of the church_. [_L._ missa]

mæsseǣfen m. _eve of a festival_.

mæsse-bōc f. nap. -bēc _‘mass-book,’ missal_, _LL_.

mæssecrēda m. _creed said at mass, Nicene creed_.

mæssedæg m. _‘mass-day,’ festival_, _Bl_.

mæssegierela m. _mass-vestment, surplice_, CP 87^19.

mæssehacele f. _mass-vestment, cope, chasuble_, LV 40, WW 327^22.

mæssehrægl n. _vestment, surplice_, CP.

mæsselāc n. _mass-offering, host_, WW.

mæsseniht f. _eve of a festival_.

mæsseprēost m. _‘mass-priest,’ clergyman, high priest_, _Æ, AO_; CP.

mæsseprēosthād m. _office or orders of a mass-priest_, BH.

mæsseprēostscīr f. _district for which a mass priest officiated_, LL.

mæsserbana m. _murderer of a priest_, W 165^28.

mæssere m. _priest who celebrates mass_, _Az_. [‘_masser_’]

mæsserēaf n. _mass-vestment_, Æ.

mæssesang m. _office of mass_.

mæssesteall m? _seat in a church choir_, v. NC 307^348.

mæssetīd f. _time of saying mass_, LL (140^20).

mæsseðegn m. _mass-priest_, LL 460[5].

mæsseðēnung f. _service of the mass, celebration of mass_, A 11·8.

mæsse-ūhta? m. or -ūhte? n. _hour, or service, of matins on a
feast-day_, NC 307.

mæssewīn (e) n. _wine used at mass_, WW.

mæssian (±) _to celebrate ‘mass,’_ _Æ_: (+) _attend mass_.

mæst I. m. (_ship’s_) _‘mast_,’ _B_; Æ, AO. II. m. ‘_mast,’ food of
swine, acorns, beechnuts_, _BC_.

mǣst (ā, ē) I. adj. (superl. of micel), _AO, Chr, Bo, Mt_. [‘_most_’]
II. adv. _mostly, for the most part, in the greatest degree, chiefly,
especially_. eal m., m. eal _almost, nearly_. m. ǣlc _nearly every one_,
Æ, AO, CP. III. n. _most_.

±mæstan _to feed with mast, fatten_, Æ, CP. [_Ger._ mästen]

mæstcyst f. _mast-socket_, WW.

mæstelberg m. _fattened hog_, MtL 6^7. [bearg]

mæsten m. _mast, pasture for swine_.

mæstenrǣden f. _right of feeding swine in mast-pastures_, KC 3·451^10.

mæstentrēow n. _tree yielding mast_, WW 137^23.

mæstland f. _land on which there is mast_, TC 140^2.

mǣstlicost adv. (superl.) _particularly_, CM 1169.

mæstling I. n. _brass_, _WW_: _brazen vessel_, _Mk_. [‘_maslin_’; _Ger._
messing] II. _fatling_, OEG 61^29.

mæstlingsmið m. _brass-worker_, WW 539^6.

mæstlōn sbpl. _pulleys at the lop of a mast_, WW 199^30.

mæstrǣden = mæstenrǣden

mæstrāp m. _mast-rope_, #Ex# 82.

mæsttwist m. _rope which supports a mast_, WW.

mæt I. pret. 3 sg. of metan. II. = mete m.

±mǣtan _to dream_ (impers.), _Æ_; (trans.) _Lcd_. [‘_mete_’]

mæte == mete

mǣte (ē) _mean, moderate, poor, inferior, small, bad_. [metan]

+mǣte _suitable as to size_, _RB_; ÆL. [‘_meet_’]

mætfæst- = metfæst-

+mǣtgan † _to lessen, limit_.

+mætgian (ÆL) = +metgian

mǣting f. _dream_, _Lcd_. [‘_meting_’]

mǣton pret. pl. of metan.

mǣð I. f. _measure, degree, proportion, rate_, _Æ_; AO: _honour,
respect, reverence_, _LL_: _what is meet, right, fitness, ability,
virtue, goodness_, Æ, CP: _condition, lot, state, rank_, Æ. [‘_methe_’]
II. n. _cutting of grass_, _BC_. [‘_math_’]

mǣð- = mǣgð-

±mǣðegian _to honour, respect, spare_, _W_; Æ. [‘_methe_’]

mæðel (e) n. _council, meeting, popular assembly_: (†) _speech,
interview_.

mæðelcwide † (e) m. _discourse_.

mæðelern † n. _council-house, prætorium_.

mæðelfrið (ðl) mn. _security (‘frið’) enjoyed by public assemblies_,
LL 3 [1], (v. 2·464).

mæðel-hēgende †, -hergende _holding conclave, deliberating_.

mæðelstede † (e) m. _place of assembly_: _battlefield_.

mæðelword (e) † n. _address, speech_.

mǣðere = mǣðre

mǣðful _humane_, _ÆGr_. [‘_metheful_’]

mǣðian = mǣðegian

mæðl = mæðel

mæðlan (_Cr_) = maðelian

mǣðlēas _immoderate, rapacious_, _Æ_. [‘_metheless_’]

mǣðlic _moderate, proportioned, befitting_, _ÆGr, TC_. adv. -līce
_humanely, courteously_. [‘_methely_’]

mǣðmēd f. _pay for haymaking_, LL 452´.

mǣðre m. _mower_, WW.

±mǣðrian _to honour_, LL.

mǣðung f. _measure, extent_, NC 307.

mǣw (ea, e) m. _‘mew,’ sea-gull_, _Cp, Shr_ (e).

mǣwpul (ā) m. _sea-gulls’ pool_, Ct.

māfealdra comp. of manigfeald.

maffian _to go astray_. maffiende _waxing, wanton_, NC 307.

mag- = mæg-

maga I. m. _‘maw,’ stomach_, _Cp, Lcd, WW_; Æ, CP. II. _powerful,
strong_.

māga I. † m. _son, descendant, young man, man_. II. gp. of mǣg.

magan swv. pres. 1, 3 sg. mæg; 2, meaht, miht; pl. magon; pret. 3 sg.
meahte _to be able, have permission or power (I ‘_may_,’ I can), to be
strong, competent, avail, prevail_, _Æ, B, Bo, G_, _etc._; CP. mæg wið
_avails against, cures_, #Lcd#.

māgas v. mǣg.

magaðe = mageðe

magdalatrēow n. _almond-tree_, WW 139^11. [_L._ amygdala]

mage f. (_WW_ 159^14) = maga

māge (ǣ) f. _female relative_, _B_; Æ. [‘_mowe_’]

māgeēct ptc. _augmented_, WW. [īecan]

mageðe (æ^1, o^2) f. _camomile, mayweed_, _Lcd, WW_. [‘_maythe_’]

magian _to prevail_, #ERPs# 12^5; NC 348.

magister (æ) m. _leader, chief, master, teacher_, _Æ, Bo_; AO, CP. [_L._
magister]

magisterdōm (mægster-) m. _office of a master or teacher_, #Sc# 120^9.
[‘_masterdom_’]

+māglic = +mālic

+magnian _to be restored to health_, GD 338^30.

mago † (magu) m. gs. maga, nap. mæcgas _male kinsman, son, descendant,
man_: _young man, servant_: _man, warrior_.

magodryht f. _band of warriors_, B 67.

magogeoguð f. _youth_, #Cr# 1429.

magorǣdend m. _counsellor of men_, #An# 1463.

magorǣswa † m. _chief, prince_.

magorinc † m. _youth, man, warrior_.

magotimber † n. _child, son_: _increase of family, progeny_.

magotūdor † n. _descendant, offspring_.

magoðe, magðe = mageðe

magoðegn † m. _vassal, retainer, warrior, man, servant, minister_.

magu = mago

māgwlite = mǣgwlite

±māh _bad, wanton, shameless, importunate_.

mahan = magon pres. pl. of magan.

+māhlic == +mālic

+māhnes f. _importunity, persistence_: _shamelessness_.

maht (#VPs#) = miht

māl I. n. _suit, cause, case, action, terms, agreement, covenanted pay_,
_Chr_. hē scylode ix scypa of māle _he paid nine ships out of
commission_, #Chr# 1049#c#. [‘_mail_’] II. n. _spot, mark, blemish_, Æ.
III. = mǣl n.

māldæg = mǣldæg

+mālic _importunate_: _wanton, shameless_: _wicked_. adv. -līce.

+mālicnes f. _importunity_: _wantonness, shamelessness_, CP.

malscrung f. _enchantment, charm_.

mālswyrd n. _sword with inlaid ornament_, TC 560^33. [mǣl]

malt (_Gl_) == mealt

malwe (_WW_) = mealwe

mamme f. _teat_, _GPH_ 401^77. [_L._ mamma]

mamor, mamra m. _lethargy, heavy sleep_, #Gl#.

māmrian _to think out, design_, #PPs# 63^5.

man I. pron. indef. _one, people, they_, _B, Mt_; Æ. [‘_man_’] II. =
mann. III. pres. 3 sg. of munan.

mān I. n. _evil deed, crime, wickedness, guilt, sin_, Æ: _false oath_,
ÆP 216^14. II. adj. _bad, criminal, false_, AO. [_ON._ mein]

+man (o) _having a mane_, WW 492^20.

man- = mann-

+māna m. _community, company_, Æ: _companionship, intercourse_, _BH_:
_cohabitation_. tō +mānan _in common_, CP. [‘_mone_’]

manað pres. 3 sg. of manian.

mānāð m. _false oath, perjury_, _LL_; HL. [‘_manath_’; _Ger._ meineid]

mānbealu n. _crime, cruelty_, #Da# 45.

manbōt (o^1) f. _fine paid to the lord of a man slain_, _LL_ (v. 2·576).
[‘_manbote_’]

mānbryne m. _fatal, destructive fire_, #Chr# 962#a#.

mancgere = mangere

manc-s, -cas, -cos, -cus m., gp. mancessa (CP) _a ‘mancus,’ thirty
silver pence, one-eighth of a pound_, _Æ, BC_.

mancwealm m. _mortality, pestilence, destruction_, _Chr_; AO.
[‘_manqualm_’]

mancwealmnes f. _manslaughter_, NG.

mancwyld (o) f. _mortality, pestilence_, BH 190^8.

mancynn n. _mankind_, _Æ, B, Bl_: _inhabitants, people, men_, CP.
[‘_mankin_’]

mancyst f. _human virtue_, MFH 169.

mand (o) f. _basket_, _Cp, MtL_ (o), _WW_. [‘_maund_’]

māndǣd f. _sin, crime_, Æ, AO, CP.

māndǣde _evil-doing, wicked_.

māndeorf _wicked_, LL (382^12).

mandrēam † m. _revelry, festivity_.

māndrinc m. _poison_, #Rd# 24^13.

mandryhten † m. _lord, master_.

maneg = manig

mānfǣhðu f. _wickedness_, #Gen# 1378.

manfaru f. _host, troop_, #Gu# 257.

mānfeld m. _field of crime_ (‘_campus sceleratus_’), AO 108^20.

mānfolm f. _evil-doer_, #PPs# 143^8.

mānfordǣdla m. _evil-doer_, B 563.

mānforwyrht † n. _evil deed, sin_.

mānfrēa † m. _lord of evil, Devil_.

mānfremmende † _sinning, vicious_.

mānful _wicked, evil, infamous, degraded_, Æ: _fearful, dire_.

mānfullic _infamous, evil, sinful_, Æ. adv. -līce, Æ.

mānfulnes f. _wickedness_, Æ.

manfultum m. _military force_, AO (o^1).

+mang I. n. _mixture, union_: _troop, crowd, multitude_: _congregation,
assembly_: _business_: _cohabitation_. in +m. _during_. on +m. _in the
midst of_. II. prep. (w. d. or a.) _among_, Æ.

māngenga m. _evil-doer_, BH 36^5.

māngenīðla m. _evil persecutor_, #An# 918.

+mangennes = +mangnes

mangere m. _trader, merchant, broker_, Æ.

māngewyrhta m. _sinner_, #PPs# 77^38.

±mangian _to trade_, Æ, CP.

+mang-nes, -ennes f. _mingling, mixture_, OEG.

mangung f. _trade, business_, Æ.

mangunghūs n. _house of merchandise_, Jn 2^16.

mānhūs n. _home of wickedness, hell_, #Ex# 535.

±manian (o) _to remind, admonish, warn, exhort, instigate_, Æ, CP:
_instruct, advise_, Æ: _claim, demand, ask_. [_Ger._ mahnen]

mānīdel † _vain and bad (words)_.

maniend m. _admonisher_, CP 400^13: _collector_.

manif- = manigf-

manig (æ^1, e^1, o^1, e^1) nap. manega _‘many,’ many a, much_, _Æ, AO,
B, BH_; CP.

manigean = manian

manigeo = menigu

manigfeald (æ, e, o^1) _manifold, various, complicated_, Æ, CP:
_numerous, abundant_: _plural_.

±manigfealdian _to multiply, abound, increase, extend_, _OEG_ (æ^1);
CP(a^3). [‘_manifold_’]

manigfealdlic _manifold_. adv. -līce _in various ways_, CP: (gram.) _in
the plural number_. [‘_manifoldly_’]

manigfealdnes f. _multiplicity, great number, abundance, complexity_,
_WW_. [‘_manifoldness_’]

manigsīðes (mani-) adv. _many times, often_, W 144^11.

manig-tēaw (æ^1), -tīwe, -tȳwe _skilful, dexterous_, Æ.

manigtēawnes (mænitȳw-) f. _skill, dexterity_, OEG.

manlēas _uninhabited_, _WW_ (o). [‘_manless_’]

mānlic _infamous, nefarious_, Æ.

manlīca m. _effigy, image, statue_.

manlīce adv. _manfully, nobly_, _B_. [‘_manly_’]

manlufu f. _love for men_, #Gu# 324.

manm- = mannm-

mann (o) m., nap. men(n) _person (male or fem.)_, _Æ, Bl, Lcd, Mt, VHy_;
AO, CP: _mankind_, _Mk, VPs_: _brave man, hero_: _vassal, servant_:
_name of the rune for =m=_.

mann-, see also man-.

manna I. m., _man_, Æ. II. n. _manna (food)_, Æ, CP. [_L._]

mannbǣre _producing men_, ÆH 1·450.

mannēaca (mon-) m. _issue, progeny_, AO 158^20.

mannian _to ‘man,’ garrison_, #Chr# 1087#e#.

mannmægen (o) n. _troop, force, cohort_, JnL 18^3.

mannmenigu (o) f. _multitude_, AO.

mannmyrring f. _destruction of men_, #Chr# 1096.

manrǣden f. _dependence, homage, service, tribute, due_, _Æ_.
[‘_manred_’]

manrīm † n. _number of men_.

mānsceatt m. _usury_, #PPs# 71^14.

mānsceaða † m. _enemy, sinner_.

mānscild f. _crime, fault, sin_, †Hy 8^23.

manscipe m. _humanity, courtesy_, _BC_. [‘_manship_’]

mānscyldig † _criminal, guilty_.

manslæht = manslieht

manslaga m. _man-slayer, murderer_, Æ.

mānslagu f. _cruel blow_, #An# 1218.

manslēan^6 _to kill, murder_, RB 16^18 (or ? two words).

manslege m. _manslaughter, homicide_.

manslieht (e^2, i^2) m. _manslaughter, murder_, _CP_. [‘_manslaught_’]

manslot _share in ownership of land_? _measure of land_? v. NC 307.
[_ON._ mannshlutr]

-mānsumian, -mānsumung v. ā-m.

manswǣs _meek_, #RPs# 24^9.

mānswara (o^2) m. _perjurer_.

mānswaru f. _perjury_. [swerian]

mānswerian^6 _to forswear, perjure oneself_, _LL_. [‘_manswear_’]

mānswica m. _deceiver, traitor_ (mann-? v. LL 2·142).

mansylen (i^2) f. _traffic in men, act of selling men as slaves_.
[sellan]

manðēaw † m. _habit, custom_ (? sometimes mānðēaw _sinful custom_).

manðēof m. _man-stealer_, v. LL 2·542.

manðwǣre (o) _gentle, kind, humane, mild, meek_, ÆL, CP. [_OHG._
mandwāri]

+manðwǣrian _to humanize_, CP 362^21.

manðwǣrnes (o) f. _gentleness, courtesy, weakness_, ÆL (ȳ^2), CP.

manu f. ‘_mane_,’ _Erf_ 1182.

manung f. _admonition_, CP: _claim_: _place of toll_: _district for
purposes of tribute or taxation_: _residents in a taxing district_.

mānwamm (o^2) m. _guilty stain_, #Cr# 1280.

mānweorc I. n. _crime, sin_. II. adj. _sinful_.

manweorod (o) m. _collection of men, troop, congregation, assembly_, AO.

manweorðung f. _adoration of human beings_, LL (248^3).

manwīse (o) † f. _manner or custom of men_.

mānword n. _wicked word_, #PPs# 58^12.

mānwrǣce _wicked_, WW 426^19.

mānwyrhta † m. _evil-doer, sinner_.

manwyrð n. _value or price of a man_, LL.

mapulder (o^2) m. _maple tree_.

mapuldern _made of maple_.

mapul-dre, -dor, -dur f., -trēo m. (Mdf) = mapulder

māra m., māre fn. (compar. of micel) _greater_, _‘more,’ stronger,
mightier_, _Æ, Bl, CP_. adv. _in addition_, _Mt_.

māran = mǣran

mārbēam (#VPs#) = mōrbēam

marc n. _a denomination of weight_ (usu. half a pound), _mark_ (money of
account).

marcian = mearcian

mare I. f. _silver weed_, #Lcd# 2·74^9. II. f. _nightmare, monster_,
_Ep_ (e), _Lcd_. [‘_mare_’]

māre v. māra.

mārels = mǣrelsrāp

marenis = mearuwnes

margen- = morgen-

market n. _market_, TC 422^20. [_L._ mercatum]

marma m. _marble_. [_L._ marmor]

marman-stān (marmel-, marm(or)-) m. _marble, piece of marble_, _Æ, Bl_.
[‘_marmstan_’]

marmstāngedelf n. _quarrying of marble_, ÆH 1·560^32.

-marod v. ā-m.

martir, martyr(e) m. ‘_martyr_,’ _BH_; Æ, AO. [_L._]

martirlogium m. _martyrology_, IM 122^45.

martr- = martyr-

martyrdōm m. ‘_martyrdom_,’ _BH_; Æ, CP.

martyrhād m. _martyrdom_.

+mar-tyrian, -trian _to ‘martyr,’_ _AO, BH_.

martyrracu f. _martyrology_, ÆL 23^334.

martyrung f. _passion (of Christ)_, _AO_ 254^24. [‘_martyring_’]

mārðu = mǣrð

mārūfle _horehound_. [_L._ marrubium]

masc = max

māse f. _name of a small bird_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ meise]

-masian v. ā-m.

massere m. _merchant_: _moneylender_, #Bk# 10.

māst = mǣst

matte (_Cp_) = meatte

mattuc (æ^1, ea^1, e^1, eo^1, o^2) m. ‘_mattock_,’ _A, AO_; Æ: _fork,
trident_.

māð pret. 3 sg. of mīðan.

maða m. _maggot, worm, grub_, _WW_. [‘_mathe_’]

maðal- = maðel-

+maðel n. _speech, talking_. [mǣl]

maðelere m. _speaker, haranguer_, _WW_. [v. ‘_mathele_’]

maðelian † (æ^1, e^1, a^2, o^2) _to harangue, make a speech, speak_,
_An_ (e), _B, Cp, Cr_ (æ). [‘_mell_,’ ‘_mathele_’]

maðelig _tumultuous, turbulent_, #KGl# 75^23.

maðelung f. _garrulity, loquacity_, _OEG_. [v. ‘_mathele_’]

māðm = māðum

māðm- see also māððum.

māðmǣht † f. _valuable thing, treasure_.

māðmcleofa (mād-) m. _treasure-chamber_, Æ (9^277).

māðmcyst f. _treasure-chest_, Mt 27^6.

māðmgestrēon n. _treasure_, B, MFH.

māðmhord n. _treasure-hoard_, #Ex# 368.

māðmhūs n. _treasure-house, treasury_, AO, CP.

māðmhyrde m. _treasurer_, #Bo# 64^13.

maðolian = maðelian

māððum == māðum, māðm

maððum-fæt n., pl. -fatu _precious vessel_, Æ.

māððumgesteald n. _treasure_, #Jul# 36.

māððumgifu f. _gift of treasure_, B 1301.

māððumgyfa m. _giver of treasure, prince, king_, #Wa# 92.

māððumsele m. _hall of treasure_, #Sol# 189.

māððumsigle n. _costly ornament_, B 2757.

māððumsweord n. _costly sword_, B 1023.

māððumwela m. _valuables_, B 2750.

maðu f. = maða

māðum m., gs. māðmes _treasure, object of value, jewel, ornament, gift_,
_Gn, Met_; CP. [‘_madme_’]

māðum- = māðm-, māððum-

māwan^7 _to ‘mow,’_ _AO, BH_.

māwpul = mǣwpul

max n. _net_, _WW_. [‘_mask_’]

māxwyrt f. _mash-wort (malt soaked in boiling water)_, #Lcd#.

me I. das. of pers. pron. ic _me_. II. (RB 35^9; 127^13) = menn
  [[II. form of “man”]]

meagol (e) _mighty, strong, firm, emphatic, impressive_. [magan]

meagollīce adv. _earnestly_, #Bl#.

meagolmōd _earnest, strenuous_.

meagolmōdnes f. _earnestness_, #Bl#.

meagolnes f. _earnestness, strength of will_, #Bl#, HL.

meaht I. == miht. II. pres. 2 sg. of magan.

meahte pret. 3 sg. of magan.

mealc pret. of meolcan.

mealclīðe ?= meolclīðe

mealehūs = meluhūs

mealewe = mealwe

mealm = mealmstān

mealmeht _sandy_? _chalky_? KC 3·394^13. [v. ‘_malm_’]

mealmstān m. _soft stone, sandstone_? _limestone_? AO 212^28.
[v. ‘_malm_’]

mealt I. n. _steeped grain, ‘malt,’_ _Ct, Ep_. [meltan] II. pret. 3 sg.
of meltan.

mealtealoð m? n? _malt-ale_, ANS 84^325.

mealtgescot n. _payment in malt_, W 171^2.

mealthūs n. ‘_malt-house_,’ _WW_.

mealtwurt f. ‘_malt-wort_,’ _WW_. [wyrt]

mealu = melu

mealwe f. ‘_mallow_,’ _Lcd_; Æ. [_L._ malva]

mear = mearh

mearc (æ, e) f. (±) _‘mark,’ sign, line of division_, _Æ, MkL_ (e):
_standard_, _ÆGr_: (±) _boundary, limit, term, border_, _BC, Gen_; CP;
Mdf. tō ðæs +mearces ðe _in the direction that_: _defined area,
district, province_, AO.

mearca m. _space marked out_.

mearcere (æ) m. _writer, notary_, OEG.

mearcgemot _court for settling boundaries of properties_? v. LL 2·143.

mearchof n. _dwelling_, #Ex# 61.

±mearcian _to ‘mark,’ stain, brand, seal_, _BC, LL, MtL, Ph_; Æ: _mark a
boundary, delimit, define, describe, designate_, _Æ, Gen_: _mark out,
design_, _Bo_: _create_: _note, observe_.

mearc-īsern, -īsen n. _branding-iron_.

mearcland n. _border-land, march, moor_: (†) _province, country,
district_: _sea-coast_, #Rd# 4^23.

mearcpæð † m. _road, path_.

mearcstapa † m. _march-haunter_.

mearcstede m. _border-land, desolate district_, #Sol# 217.

mearcðrēat m. _army, troop_, #Ex# 173.

mearcung (æ, e) f. _marking, branding_: _mark, characteristic_: (±)
_description, arrangement_: _constellation_: _title, chapter_, NG.

mearcwadu ‡ np. _shallows, water by the shore_.

mearcweard m. _wolf_, #Ex# 168.

meard = (1) meord, mēd; (2) mearð

  [[(1) Printed as shown: “meord” (meorð) and “mēd” are different
  words.]]

mēares v. mearh.

mearg, mearh (æ, e) nm. I. _‘marrow,’ pith_, _Lcd_. II. _sausage_.
[= mærg]  [[headword spelled “mærh”]]

mēargealle (e^1, e^2) m. _gentian_, #Lcd#. [mearh]

+meargian _to be rich, marrowy_, #LPs# 65^15.

mearglic _marrowy, fat_, #VPs# (e).

mearh, mearg m., gs. mēares _horse, steed_.

mearhæccel n. _sausage-meat_, WW 411^20.

mearhcofa m. _bone_, #PPs# 101^3.

mearhgehæc n. _sausage-meat_, WW 427^30.

mearmstān = marmanstān

mearn pret. 3 sg. of murnan.

+mearr I. n. _stumbling-block, obstruction, error_, CP. [_Goth._
gamarzeins] II. _wicked, fraudulent_, LL 140[1,5].

mearrian _to err_, #Bo# 55^23.

mearð (æ, e) m. _marten_, _Ep, AO_. [‘_mart_’]

mearu (æ, e, y), mear(u)w- in obl. cases _tender, soft_, _Lcd_: _frail_,
GD 119^17. [‘_meruw_’]

mearulic (merwe, mærw-) _frivolous_. adv. -līce _delicately,
luxuriously_, GD.

mearuwnes f. _tenderness, frailty_, CP.

mēast = mǣst

meatte (a) f. _‘mat,’ mattress_, _WW_. [_L._ matta]

mēaw = mǣw

mec as. of ic pers. pron.

+mec = +mæc

mēce m. _sword, blade_. [_Goth._ mēki]

mēcefisc (ǣ) m. _mullet_, #ÆGr# 308^5.

mecg = mæcg

mecgan _to mix, stir_.

mech = me

mechanisc _mechanical_, Æ. [_L._]

mēd I. f. _‘meed,’ reward, pay, price, compensation, bribe_, _ÆL_
(gs. mēdes), _B, BH, Bl_; CP. II. = mǣd

med- in comp. principally indicates mediocrity, but often comes to have
a distinct negative value; see, _e.g._, medtrum, medwīs. [midde]

mēda v. mǣd.

-mēdan v. on-m.

medder = mēder

medder-, meddr- = mēdr-

meddrosna fp. _dregs of mead_, #Lcd# 48a.

+mēde I. n. _consent, permission, agreement, covenant_. II. _agreeable,
pleasant_.

medel = mæðel

medeme (eo) _middling, average, mean, little_: _sufficient,
considerable, respectable, proper, fit, worthy, trustworthy,
perfect_, CP.

±medemian (eo^1) _to mete out, allot, assign, place_: _moderate_:
_respect, honour_, Æ: (+) _condescend_, Æ: (+) _advance, promote_.

medemlic _moderate, mediocre_: _worthy_. adv. -līce _moderately,
incompletely_: _suitably, worthily, kindly_.

medemlīcnes f. _mediocrity_, OEG.

medemmicel (Æ) = medmicel

medemnes f. _dignity, worth_, #Bo#: _benignity, condescension_, #Bl#.

medemung f. _measuring, measure_.

mēden = mægden

mēder ds. and LWS gs. of mōdor.

mēderce = mȳderce  [[headword spelled “myderce”]]

medere = mæddre

mēderen, mēdern = mēdren

mēderwyrhta = mēterwyrhta

medewyrt = meduwyrt

mēdgian _to bribe_. [mēd]

mēdgilda m. _pensioner, hireling_, Æ.

mēdl- = mǣðl-

-mēdla v. an-, ofer-m.

medlen = midlen

medm- = medem-

medmicel I. _moderate-sized, short, small, limited, unimportant, slight,
mean, poor_. II. n. _a little_.

medmicelnes f. _smallness (of mind)_, #SPs# 54^8.

medmicle comp. medmāre, adv. _humbly, meanly, slightly_.

medo = medu

medom- = medem-

mēdren I. _maternal, of a mother_. II. n. _the mother’s side
(by descent)_, LL 156[11].

+mēdren _born of the same mother_, AO 114^13.

mēdrencynn n. _mother’s kindred_.

mēdrengecynd n. _mother’s nature_, W 17^7.

mēdrenmǣg m. _maternal kinsman_.

mēdrenmǣgð f. _maternal kindred_, LL 392[3].

+mēdrian _to have the same mother_, Æ.

medrīce _of low rank_, WW 115^26.

mēdsceatt m. _payment, fee, reward, bribe, gift_, Æ, CP.

medsēlð (ǣ) f. _ill-fortune_, AO.

medspēdig _poor_, #Cra# 9.

medstrang _of middle rank_, Æ.

medtrum _weak, infirm, sickly, ill_, CP: _of lower rank_. [cp. medmicel]

medtrumnes (met-; y^2) f. _weakness, infirmity, sickness, illness,
disease_, AO, CP.

medu (eo) mn. gs. med(e)wes _‘mead’ (drink)_, _B, Rd_ (eo); AO.

meduærn n. _mead-hall, banqueting-house_, B 69 (o^2).

medubenc † f. _bench in a mead-hall_.

meduburg † f. _mead city, rejoicing city_.

medudrēam † m. _mead-joy, jollity_.

medudrenc (eo^1) m. _mead_, W 245^4.

medudrinc (o^2) m. _mead-drinking_, #Seaf# 22.

meduful † n. _mead-cup_.

medugāl † _mead-excited, drunk_.

meduheall † f. _mead-hall_.

medum- = medem-

medurǣden (eo^1) f. _strong drink_? (BT), _dealing out of mead_? (GK),
#GnE# 88.

meduscenc (eo^1) m. _mead-cup_, B 1980.

meduseld n. _mead-hall_, B 3065.

medusetl n. (eo^1, o^2) _mead-seat_, B 5.

medustīg f. _path to the mead-hall_, B 924.

meduwērig † _overpowered with mead, drunk_.

meduwong (eo^1, o^2) m. _field (where the mead-hall stood)_. B 1643.

meduwyrt (eo^1, e^2) f. _meadow-sweet_, _Lcd_: _‘rubia,’ madder_, OEG
56^40 (e^2). [‘_mead-wort_’]

medwīs _dull, stupid, foolish_, CP. [cp. medmicel]

mēdwyrhta m. _a hireling_, #Sc# 123^12.

meg == mæg

mēg = (1) mǣw; (2) mǣg

mēg- = mǣg-

megol == meagol

meh = mec, me, as. of ic.

meht == meaht, miht

mēi, mēig = mǣg

meige (#KGl# 81^32) = mæge pres. 3 sg. subj. of magan.

meiðhād (#KGl# 56^7) = mægðhād

mēl = mǣl n.

mela = melu

melc == meolc

melcingfæt = meolcfæt

meld f. _proclamation_, #Da# 648.

melda m. _reporter, informer, betrayer_, Æ.

meldan (æ) (_Rd_) = meldian

melde f. _orache (plant)_, _Lcd_. [‘_milds_’; _Ger._ melde]

meldfeoh n. _informer’s reward_, LL 96[17].

±meldian _to announce, declare, tell, proclaim, reveal_, _Ps_; Æ:
_inform against, accuse_. [‘_meld_’; _Ger._ melden]

meldung f. _betrayal_, BH 240^4.

mēle = mǣle

meledēaw mn. _honey dew, nectar_, _Ph, WW_ (mild-). [‘_mildew_’]

melewes = melwes gs. of melu.

-melle, -melnes v. ǣ-m.

melo = melu

melsc = milisc

±meltan I. (y) (sv^3) tr. and intr. _to consume by fire_, _‘melt’
become fluid, digest, dissolve, burn up_, _B, CP, El, Lcd, WW_; Æ.
II. = miltan

meltestre = myltestre

meltung f. _digestion_, #Lcd#.

melu (ea, eo) n., gs. mel(u)wes _‘meal,’ flour_, _Lcd_; Æ. [_Ger._ mehl]

melugescot n. _payment in meal_, W 171.

meluhūdern n. _meal-house_, LL 455[17].

meluhūs (ea^1, e^2) n. _meal-house_, WW 185^27.

meluw (LWS) = melu

men v. mann.

mēnan = mǣnan

mend- = mynd-

+mēne- = +mǣne-

mene (y) m. _necklace, collar, ornament, jewel_. [_Ger._ mähne]

menegian = mynegian

menego = menigu

menen (i) n. _maiden, handmaid, slave_.

menescilling m. _moon-shaped ornament, coin worn as ornament_, #Gl#.

±mengan (æ) tr. and intr. _to mix, combine, unite_, _Lk, Sat_: (±)
_associate, consort, cohabit with_, _BH, Ps_: _disturb_, _B_: (†)
_converse_. [‘_meng_’]

+mengedlic _mixed, confused_. adv. -līce.

+mengednes, +meng(d)nes f. _mingling, mixture, connection_, Æ, BH.

mengeo, mengo, mengu = menigu

mengung f. _mixture, composition_, _ZDA_: _fellowship_, GD: (+)
_confusion_. [‘_menging_’]

meni (LWS) = manig

menian = mynian

menig (LWS) == manig

menigdu f. _band of people_, WW 448^27.

menigu (a^1, æ^1, eo^3) f. usu. indecl. in sg. _company, multitude,
host_, Æ, AO, CP. [manig]

menio, meniu (LWS) = menigu

menisc = mennisc

menn v. mann.

mennen, mennenu = menen

mennesc == mennisc

mennisc I. adj. _human, natural_, _Bo, CP_; Æ. II. n. _mankind, folk,
race, people_, _Bl_; Æ CP. [‘_mannish_’]

mennisclic _human_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce, Æ.

mennisc-licnes (EHy 15^35), -nes f. _state of man, human nature,
incarnation_, _BH_; Æ: _humaneness, humanity_. [‘_mannishness_’]

menniscu f. _humanity, human state_, CP.

mentel (æ) m., gs. mentles _mantle, cloak_, CP. [_L._ mantellum]

mentelprēon m. _mantle-pin, brooch_, Ct.

menung = (*mynung), mynegung

mēo mf? gs. and nap. mēon _shoe-sole, sock_? _sandal_? RB, WW.

meocs = meox

+meodnes f. _dignity_, DR 192´. [= medemnes]

meodo, meodu = medu

meodom- = medem-

meodoma = meoduma

meodren = mēdren

meodum- = medem-

meoduma m. _weaver’s beam, treadle_? WW.

meolc I. _giving milk, milch_. II. (i, M) f. ‘_milk_,’ _BH_; Æ, AO.

meolcan^3 (e, i) _to milk_.

meolcdēond (i; -tēond) m. _suckling_, #JVPs# 8^3.

meolcfæt n. _milk-pail_, WW 123^28.

meolchwīt ‘_milk-white_,’ _GPH_.

meolcian (i) _to ‘milk,’_ _Lcd, Shr_: (±) _give milk, suckle_, _Bl_.

meolclīðe (ea) _milky_, CM 49.

meolcsūcend m. _suckling_, WW.

meolo (_Bo_) = melu

meoloc (CP) = meolc

meolu = melu

meoluc = meolc

mēon v. mēo.

meord f. _reward, pay_. [_Goth._ mizdō]

meoring f. _danger_? #Ex# 62?

meorð = meord

mēos I. m. _moss_, Æ; Mdf. II. adj. _mossy_.

mēose = mēse

meotod, meotud == metod

meottoc (_Cp_) = mattuc

+meotu = +metu nap. of +met.

meotud- = metod-

meoðon (BH) = miðon pret. pl. of mīðan.

mēowle † f. _maiden, virgin_: _woman_. [_Goth._ mawilō]

meox (e, i, y) n. _filth, dirt, dung_, _Æ, Bo, Lk_. [‘_mix_’]

meoxbearwe f. _dung-barrow_, WW 336^8.

meoxen = mixen

meoxscofl (e^1) f. _dung-shovel_, LL 455[17].

meoxwilie (cs) f. _dung-basket_, #LPs# 80^7.

mēr- = mǣr-

mera m. _incubus_, #Gl#.

merc (A) == mearc

merce = merece

+merce = +mierce

mercels = mircels

mercong (NG) = mearcung

mere I. m. (†) _sea, ocean_, _An_: _lake, pond, pool, cistern_, _B, Ep,
Jn_; CP; Mdf. [‘_mere_’] II. = mare. III. = miere

mēre (#VPs#) = mǣre I.

merebāt m. _sea-boat, vessel_, #An# 246.

merecandel f. _sun_, #Met# 13^57.

merece m. _smallage, wild celery_, _Æ, Gl, Lcd_.

mereciest f. _sea-chest, ark_, #Gen# 1317.

meredēað † m. _death at sea_.

meredēor n. _sea-animal_, B 558.

merefara m. _sailor_, B 502.

merefaroð † m. _surging of the waves_.

merefix m. _sea-fish_, B 549.

mereflōd † m. _sea, body of water, deluge_.

mere-grēot (Æ), -grot n., -grota m. _pearl_.

meregrund † m. _lake-bottom, depths of the sea_.

merehengest † m. _sea-horse, ship_.

merehrægl n. _sail_, B 1905.

merehūs † n. _sea-house, the ark_.

merehwearf m. _sea-shore_, #Ex# 516.

mērehwīt _pure white, sterling (of silver)_. [mǣre II.]

merelād f. _sea-way_, #Hu# 27.

merelīðende m. _seafaring (man)_, _sailor_.

mere-menn, -mennen, -menin n. _mermaid, siren_, _Cp, WW_. [‘_mermin_’]

mere-næddra m., -næddre, -nǣdre f. _‘murena,’ sea-adder, lamprey_.

meresmylte _quiet as the sea, calm_, #Met# 21^12.

meresteall m. _stagnant water_, MFH 169.

merestrǣt † f. _sea-path_.

merestrēam † m. _sea-water_.

merestrengo f. _strength in swimming_, B 523.

mereswīn n. _porpoise, dolphin_, _Cp, Lcd_. [‘_mereswine_’]

meretorht (æ) † _(rising) bright from the sea_.

meretorr m. _towering wall of the (Red) sea_, #Ex# 484.

mereðyssa † m. _ship_.

mereweard m. _sea-warden_, #Whale# 53.

merewērig _sea-weary_, #Seaf# 12.

merewīf n. _water-witch_, B 1519.

merg (_Cp_ 195#m#) = mearg

merg- = mearg-, meri-, morg-, myrg-

mer-gealle, -gelle = meargealle  [[headword spelled “mēargealle”]]

merian _to purify, cleanse_, _Sat_: _test_. [‘_mere_’]

merice (#Gl#) = merce

merien = morgen

merig = (1) myrge; (2) mearg

merig- = myrg-

merigen (Æ, AO) = morgen

merisc = mersc

merne = mergenne ds. of mergen.  [[under “morgen”]]

merr- = mierr-

mērs- = mǣrs-

mersc (æ) m. _‘marsh,’ swamp_, _Bl, Cp_; CP.

merschōfe m. _marsh hove_, #Lcd# 35b.

merscland n. _marsh-land_, #Chr# 1098.

merscmealwe f. ‘_marsh-mallow_,’ _Lcd_.

merscmeargealle f. _gentiana pneumonanthe_, #Lcd#.

merscware pl. _inhabitants of marshes_. (1) _Romney marsh_, #Chr# 796.
(2) _the fens_? #Chr# 838.

mertze f. _merchandise_, WW 32^25. [_L._ mercem]

merð = mearð

merðern _made of skins of martens_.

mērðu (N) = mǣrð

meru (_MtR_) = mearu

meruw-, merwe- = mearu(w)-

mēs (K) = mȳs, v. mūs.

mesa fpl. _dung_, #Lcd# 37a.

mēsan _to eat_, #Rd# 41^52. [mōs]

mēse (ēo, ī, ȳ) f. _table_: _what is placed on a table_. [_L._]

mess- = mæss-

mēsta (#KGl#) = mǣsta superl. of micel.

±met (usu. +) _measure (vessel or amount)_, _Æ_: _act of measuring,
appointed share, quantity_, _Mt_: _space, distance_, _LL_: _boundary,
limit_, _Bo, Met_: _manner, degree, way_: _ability, capacity_: _rule,
law_: _mood_ (gram.): _metre_: _moderation_, _MtR_. ealle +mete _in all
respects_. on +m. _in vain_, #RPs# 88^48. nānum +m. _by no means, on no
account_. [‘_met_,’ ‘_i-met_’]

+met _suitable, fit, proper, apt, meet_. adv. -mēte.

+mēt = +mōt

-mēt v. wēa-m.  [[under “wēamēt”]]

meta (#Sc# 153) = mete

metærn = meteærn

±metan^5 _to measure_, _‘mete’ out, mark off_, _Æ, Ex, Mt, VPs_:
_compare_, _Bo_; CP: _es imate_, _Bl_: m. wið _pass over, traverse_,
_B_.

±mētan I. _to ‘meet,’ find, find out, fall in with, encounter_, _Bo,
Bl_; Æ, AO, CP. [gemōt] II. _to paint, design_, _ÆGr_. [‘_mete_’]
  [[I. “gemōt” listed as “+mōt”]]

metbælg m. _wallet_, LkR 22^35.

mete (æ) m. nap. mettas _‘meat,’ food_, _BH, Lk, Sc_; Æ, AO, CP.

mēte = mǣte

meteærn n. _refectory_, GD, WW.

meteāflīung f. _atrophy_, WW.

meteclyfa m. _food-store, pantry_, OEG 56^270.

metecorn n. _allowance of corn to dependents_, _TC_. [‘_metecorn_’]

metecū f. _cow for killing_, LL.

metecweorra m? _surfeit, indigestion_.

+mētednes f. _finding, discovery_, #LPs# 27^4.

metefæt [met-] n. _dish_, GPH 403.

metefǣtels m. _cupboard for food_, _WW_ 107^5. [‘_metefetill_’]

meteg- = metg-

metegafol n. _payment in food_, LL 448[4,5].

metegearwa fp. _preparations of food_, #Lcd# 78b.

metegyrd = metgeard

metelǣst = metelīest

metelāf f. _leavings of a meal_.

metelēas _without food_, Æ.

mete-līest (AO), -lē(a)st, -līst, -lȳst f. _lack of food, starvation_.

metend m. _measurer_: _God_.

mētenēad f. _requisites in the way of food_, LL 383´? (v. 2·145).

mēter n. ‘_metre_’ (poet.), _A, BH_. [_L._]

meterǣdere m. _reader at mealtimes_, NC 309.

mētercræft m. _art of versifying_, BH 258^15.

mētercund _relating to metre_, WW.

mētere m. _painter_.

mēterfers n. _hexameter verse_, BH.

mētergeweorc n. _verse_, BH 484^9.

mēterlic _metrical_, OEG.

metern = meteærn

mēterwyrhta m. _metrician, poet_, WW.

metesōcn f. _craving for food, appetite_, #Lcd# 65a.

metesticca m. _measuring-rod_, WW 126^35.

meteswam m. _edible mushroom_, WW.

metetīd f. _meal-time_, GD 277^24.

meteðearfende † _needing food, destitute_.

meteðegn m. _seneschal, steward_, #Ex# 131.

meteðing n. _operation connected with cooking_, NC 309.

meteūtsiht f. _dysentery_, WW.

+metfæst _moderate, reasonable, modest_.

+metfæstan (æ^1, e^2) _to compare_, #LPs# 48^21.

+metfæstlic _moderate_. adv. -līce _modestly, humbly, meekly_.

+metfæstnes f. _moderation, modesty_, BH.

metfæt = metefæt

+metfæt n. _a measure (vessel)_, Æ.

+metfest- = +metfæst-

metgeard f. _measuring-stick, rod, pole, perch_, WW 147^20.

±metgian _to moderate, control, govern_, Æ, CP: _weigh in mind,
consider_: _assign due measure to_.

+metgiend m. _ruler, governor_, AS 11^6.

±metgung f. _moderation, temperance_, AO, CP: _reflection, meditation_:
_rule, regulation_.

metgyrd = metgeard

metian I. _to supply with food, provision_. II. = metgian

mēting I. (±) f. _meeting (friendly or hostile)_, _assembly,
congregation_, RB 46^2: (+) _finding, discovery_. II. _painting,
picture_, Æ.

+metlǣcan _to moderate_, CP 101^12.

+metlic _fitting, suitable_: _moderate_. adv. -līce.

+metnes f. _moderation_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

+mētnes = +mētednes

metod † m. _fate_: _Creator, God, Christ_.

metodsceaft † f. _decree of fate, doom, death_. gewītan m. sēon, tō
metodsceafte _to die_, B.

metodwang (meotud-) m. _battlefield_, #An# 11.

metrāp m. _measuring-rope, sounding-line_, Cp 178#b#.

mētsceat = mēdsceatt

metscipe m. _feeding, meal_, _LL_ 178, 8, 1. [‘_meteship_’]

metseax n. _meat-knife_, AO.

±metsian _to supply with food_.

metsung f. _feeding, provisioning_, #Chr#.

+metta m. _sharer in food_, _Æ_. [‘_mette_’]

mettac = mattuc

mettas v. mete.

mette- = mete-

mētte pret. 3 sg. of mētan.

metten f. _one of the Fates_, #Bo# 102^22.

mettian = mētan I.

+metting = +mēting

-mētto v. wēa-m.  [[under “wēamēt”]]

mettoc (_Ep_) = mattuc

mettrum == medtrum

metud (N) = metod

mēðe (†) _tired, worn out, dejected, sad_: _troublesome_. [_Ger._ müde]

meðel = mæðel

±mēðgian _to exhaust, tire out, impair_.

mēðian _to grow weary_, #Lcd# 57a.

mēðig _tired, weary_, AO.

meðl = mæðl, mæðel

meðl- = mæðl-, maðel-

mēðnes f. _fatigue_, OET (Bd^2).

+meðrian _to honour_.

mēw = mǣw

mexscofl = meoxscofl

miccl- = micel-, micl-

micel (y) adj. comp. māra, superl. mǣst(a) _great, intense, much, many_,
_Æ, BC, Bo, Chr, Lcd_; AO, CP: (of time) _long_: _loud_. sb. with gen.
_much_, AO, CP. adv. _greatly, much_, _CP, Gen_. [‘_mickle_’]

micelǣte (y) _greedy_, #Shr# 16^20.

miceldōend (i^2) _doing great things_, DR 45^7.

micelhēafdede _big-headed_, WW 380^12.

micelian = miclian

micellic _great, splendid, magnificent_. adv. -līce _greatly, grandly,
splendidly_: _very, exceedingly_.

micelmōd _magnanimous_, #PPs# 144^3.

micelnes (y) f. _greatness, size_, Æ, CP: _multitude, abundance_:
_magnificence_.

micelsprecende _boasting_, #LPs# 11^4.

micelu (y) f. _largeness, size_, #Lcd#.

micg == mycg

micga m., micge f. _urine_, _Lcd_. [‘_mig_’]

micgða = migoða

micl- = micel-

micle, micles, miclum adv. (obl. cases of micel) _much, very, greatly_.

±miclian (y) _to become great, increase_, _An_; AO: _make great, make
larger, magnify, extol_, _Bl_. [‘_mickle_’]

±miclung f. _the doing of great things_.

micul = micel

mid I. prep. w. d. inst. (WS) and a. (A only) _with, in conjunction
with, in company with, together with_, _Æ, BC, BH, Chr_: _into the
presence of_: _through, by means of, by_, _BH, Gen_: _among, in_: _at_
(time): _in the sight of, opinion of_, _ÆL, MtL_. m. ealle, eallum
_altogether, completely, entirely_, _Æ, Chr_. m. ðām _with that,
thereupon_. m. ðām ðe _when_. m. ðām ðæt _through that, on that account,
because, when_. m. ðȳ (ðe) _when, while_. II. adv. _at the same time,
together, simultaneously, likewise_, _Lcd_. [‘_mid_’] III. = midd

midd superl. mid(e)mest _mid, middle, midway_, _BH, CP, Lcd_. tō middes
adv. _in the midst_. [‘_mid_’]

middæg m. _‘mid-day,’ noon_, _Lcd_: _one of the canonical hours, sext_,
_WW_. fram middæge oð nōn _from noon to 3 p.m._, Æ.

middæglic adj. _mid-day, meridian_.

middægsang m. _mid-day service, sext_.

middægtīd f. _noon_, WW 450^5.

middægðēnung f. _dinner_, NC 309.

middan (on) v. onmiddan.

middandæglic = middæglic

middaneard (_Jn_) == middangeard

middangeard m. _the globe, world, earth_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP: _mankind_.
[‘_middenerd_’; _ON._ miðgarðr]

middangeardlic _earthly_, BH 118^19.

middansumer m. _midsummer (24 June)_.

middanwinter m. _midwinter, Christmas_.

midde I. adj. _mid, middle_. II. f. _middle, centre_ (only in phr. on
middan).

middel I. n. _‘middle,’ centre_, _El, Mk, Ps, WW_: _waist_, _Bl_. II.
adj. (superl. midlest) _middle, intermediate_, _BC, BH_.

middeldæg m. _mid-day, noon_, #Lcd#.

middeldǣl m. _middle_, AO 10^6.

middelfinger m. _middle finger_.

middel-flēra m., -flēre f. _partition, septum_, WW.

middelfōt m. _instep_, WW 160^25.

middelgemǣru npl. _central region_, #Sol# 255.

middelgesculdru np. _part of the body between the shoulders_, WW 159^17.

middelniht † f. _midnight_.

middelrīce n. _the middle kingdom_, #Chr# 887#a#.

midden- = middan-

midde-niht, -neaht, middernæht (_LkL_) f. ‘_midnight_.’ [v. ES 39·350]

middesumer = middansumer

middeweard I. adv. _in the middle of, through the midst_, _AO_. II. adj.
_middle_. III. sb. _middle_, _LPs_. [‘_midward_’]

middewinter = middanwinter

middun- (N) = middan-

mideard = middangeard

midel = middel

midemest v. midd.

midfæsten m. _mid-Lent_.

mid-feorh, -feorwe (CP), -ferh(ð) mn. _youth, middle age_, (‘_juventus_’
#Gl#).

midfyrhtnes f. _middle age_, #Bl# 163.

midgearwung f. _preparation_, MkL p 5^10.

midgesīð n. _companion_, OEG 680.

midhelp [mið-] f. _help, assistance_, DR 29^18.

midhlȳte m. ‘_consortium_,’ NC 309.

midhrif nm. _‘midriff,’ diaphragm_, _Lcd_: _bowels_.

mid-hriðre, -hryðre n. _diaphragm_, _Cp, WW_. [‘_midred_’; hreðer]

-midian v. ā-.

mīdl n. _bit (of a bridle)_, Æ: _oar-thong_.

midle = middele, ds. of middel.

+midleahtrian _to reproach_? #Sc# 200^6.

midlen (e) n. _middle, centre, midst_.

midlencten n. _mid-Lent_.

midlest superl. of middel.

mīdlhring m. _ring of a bit_, WW 456^14.

+midlian _to halve, divide_, #VPs#.

±mīdlian _to bridle, check, curb_, CP: _muzzle_, W 191.

midligend m. _mediator_, BH 206^26.

midlung f. _middle, midst_. adv. -lunga _to a moderate extent_.

midmest v. midd.

midmycel = medmicel

midnedæg m. _mid-day_.

midnes f. _middle, midst_.

midniht f. _midnight_, Æ.

midor compar. of midd, adj.

midrād f. _riding in company_, LL 175[4].

mīdrece = mȳderce  [[headword spelled “myderce”]]

midrif = midhrif

midsingend m. _one who sings with another_, WW 129^25.

±midsīð(eg)ian _to accompany, associate with_.

midspecend m. _interlocutor_, MP 1·592.

midspreca m. _advocate_, ÆH 1·388.

midsumer (e^3) m. ‘_midsummer_,’ _A_.

midswēgan *‘_concinere_’ #EPs# 57^3.

midðām, midðy = mid ðam, mid ðȳ

midðeahtian _to consent_, RHy 6^27.

midweg m. _midway_, CP 399^13, GD 314^11.

midwinter m. ‘_midwinter_,’ _Christmas_, _Lcd_.

midwist f. _presence, society_.

midwunung f. _living in company_, Æ.

midwyrhta m. _worker together with, co-operator_, CP.

midyrfenuma m. _coheir_, #Sc# 148^4.

mieht = miht

mielt pres. 3 sg. of meltan.

Mierce, Miercan pl. _Mercians_: _Mercia_, #Chr# (lit. _borderers_; cp.
mearc).

+mierce (e) n. _boundary, limit_, A 4·141^35: _sign, token_, MkL 16^17.

Miercisc _Mercian_, LL (e).

miere (e, i, y) f. ‘_mare_,’ _BH, WW_. [mearh]

mierra m. _deceiver_, MtL 27^63 (e).

±mierran (e, i, y) _to ‘mar,’ disturb, confuse_, _CP_: _scatter,
squander, waste_: _upset, hinder, obstruct_, _Æ_; AO: _err_, _MtL_.

mierrelse (y) f. _cause of offence_, #Jul# 338.

mierrend (y) _prodigal, wasteful_, NC 311.

mierring (e, i, y) f. _hindering_: _squandering, waste_, CP.

±mīgan^1 _to make water_, #ÆGr#.

migeða = migoða

migga (Æ) = micga

miggung, mīging f. _making water_, WW.

migol _diuretic_, #Lcd#.

migoða m. _urine_, #Lcd#.

miht (a, æ, ea, e, ie, y) I. f. _‘might,’ bodily strength_, _Bl, Lcd_:
_power, authority, ability_, _BH_; Æ: _virtue_, _Lcd_: _mighty work,
miracle_, G. II. adj. †_mighty, powerful_: _possible_.

mihte pret. sg. of magan.

mihtelēas = mihtlēas

mihtelic, mihtlic _possible_. adv. -līce _‘mightily,’ powerfully, by
might, miraculously_, _Æ, BH_.

mihtesetl n. _seat of power_, EETS 34·301.

mihtig (æ, ea) _‘mighty,’ important_, _BH, VPs_ (æ): _able, effective_,
_Lcd_: _possible_. adv. -līce, _Bo_. [‘_mightily_’]

mihtlēas _powerless, weak, exhausted_, Æ.

mihtmōd n. _violent temper, passion_, #Ex# 149.

mihtu = miht ðu

mīl I. f. ‘_mile_,’ _Bl, WW_; AO. [_L._] II. n. _millet_, _WW_.
[‘_mile_’]

milc (#VPs#) == meolc

milde I. adj. _‘mild,’ merciful, kind, generous, gentle, meek_, _B, Bl,
Gu, LL_; AO, CP. II. adv. _mercifully, graciously_, _Cr_.

mildēaw = meledēaw

mildelic _propitious_. adv. _graciously, affably, kindly_, _AO_; Æ.
[‘_mildly_’]

+mildgian _to mitigate_, #VPs#.

mild-heort, -heortlic _merciful, clement, compassionate_, _MtL_ (milt-);
AO, Æ. [‘_mild-heart_’] adv. -līce, Æ, CP.

mildheortnes f. _loving-kindness, mercy, pity_, _LL_; Æ, AO.
[‘_mildheartness_’]

mildian _to become mild_, GPH 399.

mildnes f. _mildness, mercy_, NC 309.

milds == milts

milescian _to become mild, mellow_, WW. [milisc]

mīlgemæt m. _mile-measure, milestone_? KC 3·252^21.

mīlgemearc n. _measure by miles_, B 1362.

mīlgetæl n. _mile_, #Nar# 33.

milisc (e, y) _sweet, mild, mulled_.

mīlite _soldiers_, NC 309.

mīlitisc _military_, GD. [_L._ miles]

mīlpæð † m. _distance reckoned by miles_? _road with milestones on it_?
#El, Ex, Run#.

+milscad _honeyed, mixed with honey_, WW (v. milescian).

milscapuldor f. _sweet apple tree_, #Gl#.

milt- = mild-

±miltan (e, y) (tr. and intr.) _to melt_, Æ: _digest_: _refine, purge_.

milt-coðe, -coðu f. _disease of the spleen_, #Lcd#.

milte mf. _‘milt,’ spleen_, _Gl, Lcd_; Æ. [_Ger._ milz]

miltesēoc _splenetic_.

miltestre = myltestre

miltewærc m. _pain in the spleen_, CP.

milts f. _mercy, compassion, benevolence, kindness, favour_, CP: (†)
_joy_. [milde]

±miltsian (w. d.) _to compassionate, pity, show mercy_, _Bo, Mt, Ps_; Æ,
CP: _soften, make merciful_. [‘_milce_,’ ‘_i-milce_’]

±miltsiend m. _pitier_.

miltsigendlic _pardonable, venial_, Æ.

miltsung f. (±) _mercy, sympathy, pity, indulgence, pardon_, Æ, CP:
_moderation, reduction (of punishment)_, LL 468[10].

miltwræc = miltewærc

milz = milts

mīma m. ‘_mime_,’ _MH_.

+mimor (w. d.) _known_. adv. -līce _by heart_.

min †? _small_: _common, vile_.

mīn I. pron. _my, ‘mine,’_ _Æ, B, G_. mīnes ðances _by my will_. II. gs.
of ic _of me_.

mind == mynd

mindōm? m. _state of exile_, #PPs# 54^7.

mine = myne

minet- = mynet-

minlic _petty_.

mīnlīce adv. _in my manner_, WW 449^16.

minnæn _‘manipulos,’ sheaves_? #EPs# 128^7; ‘_magnalia_,’ 105^21.

minne I. nap. of min. II. = myne

minnen = menen

±minsian _to diminish_.

minsung f. _parsimony_, OEG 3748.

mint? (MtR), minte f. ‘_mint_,’ CP; Mdf. [_L._]

mio- = meo-

mircapuldur (Cp) = milscapuldor?

Mirce, Mircan = Mierce

mirce I. (y) adj. _murky, dark, black, uncanny, evil_, _B, Ph_. II.
adv.? #An# 1315. III. n. _murkiness, darkness_, _Da_ 448. [‘_murk_’]

mircels (e, y) mf. _sign, token, seal, signet_: _mark, marked place_,
ÆL: _trophy_, #Gu# 429. [mearc]

mire = miere

mīre = mīnre gdfs. of mīn.

mirg-, mīrig- = myrg-

mirgð, mirhð = myrgð

mirr- = mierr-

misbegān anv. _to disfigure_, MtL 6^16.

misbēodan^2 (w. d.) _to ill-use, injure, do wrong to_, _LL, W_.
[‘_misbede_’]

misboren _abortive_, _Lcd_: _degenerate_. [‘_misborn_’]

misbrōden _drawn aside_, WW 224^21.

misbyrd f. _abortion_, #Gl#.

misbyrdo f. _malformation_, #Lcd#.

misbysnian _to set a bad example_, ÆH 2·50.

miscalfian _to cast a calf_, WW 456^12.

miscenning f. _flaw in an indictment_: _payment for correction of such a
flaw_, v. LL 2·148; 184.

miscian _to mix, apportion_. [_L._]

miscrōcettan _to croak or shriek horribly_, #Guth# 36^1. [crācettan]

miscweðan^5 _to speak ill, curse_, NG: _speak incorrectly_.

miscyrran (= ie) _to pervert_, #Met# 2^8.

misdǣd f. _‘misdeed,’ evil deed, sin_, _CP_; Æ.

misdōn anv. _to do evil, transgress, do amiss, err_, _JnL, LL, W_.
[‘_misdo_’]

mīse = mēse

misefesian _to cut the hair amiss_, _LL_ (254^13).

misendebyrdan (i^4) _to arrange amiss_, LL 382.

misenlic, misendlic = missenlic

misfadian _to order amiss_, LL.

misfadung f. _misconduct, irregularity_.

misfaran^6 _to go wrong, transgress_, CP: _fare ill_, _Æ, W_.
[‘_misfare_’]

misfēdan (oe) _to nourish ill_, #EVPs#.

misfeng m. _misdeed, sin_, NC 309.

misfēran _to do wrong, err, transgress_, _Æ_. [‘_misfere_’]

misfōn^7 _to make a mistake, be deceived_: _fail to get_.

misgedwield n. _error, perversion_, #Jul# 326.

misgehygd fn. _evil thought_, #An# 772.

misgelimp n. _misfortune_, W 211^30.

misgemynd f. _evil memory_, #Sol# 495.

mis(ge)wider m. _bad weather, storm_.

misgrētan _to greet amiss, insult_, Ct.

misgȳman _to neglect_, _LL_. [‘_misyeme_’]

mishæbbende _being ill_, MtL 8^16.

mishealdan^7 _not to keep, to neglect_, Æ (9^130).

mishealdsumnes f. _want of observation, carelessness_, LL (196^3).

mishērnes f. _act of disobedience_, W.

mis-hweorfed, -hwyrfed, -hworfen _perverted, inverted_.

mishȳran _to hear amiss, not to listen to, disobey_, _RB, W_.
[‘_mishear_’; hīeran]

mislǣdan _to ‘mislead,’_ _Æ_.

mislǣran _to teach amiss, give bad advice to_, ÆL 5·119.

mislār f. _ill teaching, evil suggestion_.

mislēc- = mislīc-

mislic _unlike, various, manifold_, _Bl, Bo_; Æ, CP: _wandering,
erratic_. [‘_mislich_’] adv. -līce _in various ways, diversely,
aimlessly_, _Bo, Chr_. [‘_misliche_’]

mislīcian (w. d.) _to displease, disquiet_, _Æ, CP_. [‘_mislike_’]

mislicnes f. _variety, diversity_, Æ.

mislimp n. _misfortune_.

mislimpan^3 impers. w. d. _to go wrong, turn out badly_, AO.

mislybban _to lead a bad life_, _Æ_. [‘_mislive_’]

mismicel _of varying sizes_? #Ex# 373.

misrǣcan _to abuse_, ÆH 2·590^25.

misrǣd m. _misguidance_, Æ: _misconduct_, Æ.

misrǣdan _to advise wrongly_, RB.

miss n. _absence, loss_ (Swt).

miss- = mis-

missan (w. g.) _to ‘miss’ (a mark), _B_: (w. d.) _escape the notice of a
person_.

missare = missere

misscrence _distorted, shrivelled_, #Guth#.

misscrȳdan _to clothe amiss_, ÆH 1·530.

misse- = mis-

missenlic _various, manifold, different, diverse_, AO. adv. -līce, CP.

missenlicnes f. _variety, diversity_: ‘_qualitas_’? GD 46^9.

missere † n. _half-year, year_.

misspōwan^7 _to fare badly_, AO 82^34.

missprecan^5 _to grumble, murmur_.

mist m. ‘_mist_,’ _Æ, Met, WW_: _dimness (of eyesight)_, _Æ, Lcd_.

mist- = mis-

mistǣcan _to teach amiss_, _Æ_. [‘_misteach_’]

mistel m. _mistletoe_, _Cp, Ep_: _basil_, _Lcd_. [‘_missel_’]

mistellām n. _birdlime_, WW 279^15.

misteltān m. ‘_mistletoe_,’ _WW_ (i^2).

mistglōm m? _misty gloom_, #Whale# 47.

misthelm m. _covering of mist_, #Jul# 470.

misthlið † n. _misty cliff, cloud-capped slope_.

mistian _to be or grow misty_, _Æ_. [‘_mist_’]

mistīd f. _evil time_, FM 360^12.

mistīdan (impers.) _to miscarry, fail_, _LL_ 348´. [‘_mistide_’]

mistig ‘_misty_,’ _B_.

mistihtan _to lead astray, dissuade_, Æ.

mistihtendlic _dehortative_, #ÆGr# 225^12.

mistil- = mistel-

mistīmian [impers. w. d.] _to happen amiss_, _Bas_. [‘_mistime_’]

mistlic == mislic

mistran _to grow dim_, Æ.

mistrīwan _to mistrust_, DR 39^16.

mistūcian _to ill-treat_, #Chr# 1083, GD 15.

misðēon^3 _to mis-thrive, degenerate_.

misweaxan^6 _to grow improperly_, Æ.

miswendan _to pervert, abuse_, Æ: _be perverted, err_, Æ.

miswende _erring, ill-behaving_, Æ.

miswenian _to misuse, abuse_, #Sc# 224^10 (?= miswerian, MLN 25·80).

misweorc n. _misdeed_, JnR 3^19.

misweorðan^3 _to turn out amiss_, W.

miswider = misgewider

miswissian _to mislead_, LL 130; 381.

miswrītan^1 _to write incorrectly_, _ÆGr_. [‘_miswrite_’]

miswurðian (= eo) _to dishonour, illtreat_, LL 381[25].

miswyssigan = miswissian

mīte f. _‘mite’ (small insect)_, _WW_ 122^6.

mitta m., mitte f. _a measure, bushel_, _Ct, WW_; Æ, CP. [‘_mit_’;
metan]

mittan = mētan

mitte = mitta

mitting (Æ, AO) = mēting

mittȳ = mid ðȳ

mið (_LkL_) = mid

mīðan^1 _to hide, conceal_ (tr. and intr.), _keep to oneself,
dissemble_, _BH, Bo, WW_; CP: _conceal oneself, remain concealed_,
_Lcd_: (†)_avoid, shun, refrain from_. [‘_mithe_’]

mīðl = mīdl

mix = meox

mixen (y) f. _dung-heap, dung_, _Æ, LkL_. [‘_mixen_’]

mixendynge (y^1) f. _dung_, LL 454[9].

mixenplante f. _nightshade (plant)_, #Lcd#.

mixforce (y) f. _dung-fork_, WW 106^39.

mixian = miscian

mōd n. (±) _heart, mind, spirit_, _‘mood,’ temper_, _B, BH, Bl_; Æ, AO,
CP: _courage_, _B_; AO: _arrogance, pride_, AO: _power, violence_.

+mōd _of one mind, harmonious, peaceful_, CP.

mōdblind † _blind, undiscerning_.

mōdblissiende † _exulting_.

mōdbysgung f. _anxiety_, #Dom# 84.

mōdcearig † _sorrowful of heart_.

mōdcearu † f. _sorrow, grief_.

mōdcræft m. _intelligence_.

mōdcræftig _intelligent_.

moddor = mōdor

moddren _of mothers_, #ApT# 4^12.

moddri(g)e = mōdrige

mōde- = mōdig-

mōdearfoð n. _grief of mind_, †Hy 4^87.

mōdeg = mōdig

mōder == mōdor

mōdercynd = mēdrengecynd

mōderge = mōdrige

mōdful _proud, haughty_, #Lcd# 3·188^26.

mōdgehygd † n. _thought_.

mōdgemynd † n. _mind, thought_.

mōdgēomor † _sad, dejected_.

mōdgeðanc m. _thought, understanding, intellect, mind_.

mōdgeðōht m. _thought, understanding, mind_.

mōdgeðyldig _patient_, #An# 983.

mōdgewinna m. _care_, #Gen# 2797.

mōdgian = mōdigian  [[under “mōdigan”]]

mōdgidanc (N) = mōdgeðanc

mōdglæd _joyous_, #Gu# 1311.

mōdglēaw _wise_, #Sol# 180.

mōdhæp? _brave_, #Ex# 242 (GK).

mōdhete m. _hatred_, #Gen# 1756.

mōdhord n. _secret thoughts_, #An# 172.

mōdhwæt † _brave, bold_.

mōdig (CP), mōdi _spirited, daring, bold, brave, high-souled,
magnanimous_, _B_; Æ: _impetuous, headstrong_, _Æ_; CP: _arrogant,
proud_, Æ, CP. [‘_moody_’]

mōdigan, mōdigian _to grow proud or overbearing, be high-minded, glory,
exult, show bravery_, Æ: _take offence through pride_, Æ.

mōdiglic (mōde-) _high-souled, lofty, proud_: _brave, bold_: _splendid,
magnificent_. adv. -līce, _Ma_ (mōde-). [‘_moodily_’]

mōdignes f. _greatness of soul_: _pride, arrogance, haughtiness_, _Æ_.
[‘_moodiness_’]

mōdilic = mōdiglic

mōdlēas _spiritless_, #KGl# 66^40.

mōdlēast f. _want of courage_, Æ.

mōdlēof _dear, precious_, FT 28.

mōdlufu f. _heart’s affection, love_.

+mōdod _disposed_, ÆH 1·524^18.

mōdor (e^2) f., ds. mēder ‘_mother_,’ _WW_; (_of animals_), _LL_;
AO, CP.

mōdorcild (mōð-) n. _a child of one’s (own) mother_, #PPs# 68^8.

mōdorcynn n. _maternal descent_, #Chr# 1067#d#.

mōdorhealf f. _mother’s side_, #Chr# 1076#d#.

modorhrif n. _womb_, #PPs#.

mōdorlēas (e^2) _motherless_, W 228^22.

mōdorlic (e^2) _maternal_, _ÆGr_. [‘_motherly_’]

modorlufu f. _love for a mother_, NC 309.

mōdorslaga m. _matricide_, WW 335^6.

mōdrige, mōdrie f. _mother’s sister, maternal aunt_, Æ, AO: _cousin_.
[mōdor]

mōdrōf _valiant_, #An# 1493.

mōdsefa † m. _heart, mind, spirit, soul_: _thought, imagination,
purpose, character_.

mōdsēoc _sick at heart_, #Gen# 1235.

mōdsēocnes f. _disease of the heart_, WW 199^35.

mōdsnotor † _wise_.

mōdsorg † f. _heart-sorrow_.

mōdstaðol m. _principle, character_, LL (318^37).

mōd-staðolnes, -staðolfæstnes f. _firmness of mind_, W 53^10.

+mōdsumian _to agree_, CP.

+mōdsumnes f. _agreement, concord_, CP.

mōdswīð † _resolute_.

mōd-ðracu f. gs. -ðræce _courage_, B 385.

mōdðrēa m. _anguish_, #Rd# 4^50.

mōdðwǣre _meek_, #LPs# 24^9.

mōdðwǣrnes f. _patience, meekness_, W.

mōdur = mōdor

mōdwǣg m. _proud wave_, #Ex# 499.

mōdwelig _gifted, talented, wise_, †CP.

mōdwlanc † _stout-hearted_: _haughty_.

mōdwyn f. _heart’s joy, property_, #Rd# 87^7.

moetan (Cp) = mētan

mohða, mohðe (N) = moððe

molcen n. _coagulated or curdled milk_. [cp. _Ger._ molke]

molda? m. v. molde II.

moldærn † n. _grave_.

moldcorn n. _granular tuber of saxifraga granulata, and the plant
itself_, #Lcd#.

molde I. f. _sand_, _‘mould,’ loose earth, dust, soil_, _Cp, BH_; Æ:
_land, country_: _world_. =II?= f. _top of the head_, _Lcd_ (or molda?).
[‘_mould_’]

moldern = moldærn

moldgewind n. _top of the head_, NC 310.

moldgræf † n. _grave_.

moldhrērende _moving upon earth_, #Creat# 27.

moldhȳpe f. _heap of dust_, ÆH 1·492.

moldstōw f. _site, sepulchre_, GPH 391.

moldweg † m. _earth_.

moldwyrm m. _earth-worm_, #Soul# 72.

molegn n. _curds_, #Gl#.

molegnstycce n. _piece of curd_, #Gl#.

moling = molegn

molsn n? _decay_, NC 310.

±molsnian _to moulder, decay_, Æ.

molten pp. of meltan.

momra = mamra  [[under “mamor”]]

mon == man

mōna m. ‘_moon_,’ _Bo, Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP.

mōnanǣfen m. _Sunday evening_, LL.

mōnandæg m. ‘_Monday_,’ _A, Jn_.

mōnanniht f. _Monday eve, i.e. Sunday evening_, LL.

mōnað m. nap. mōn(e)ðas, mōnað ‘_month_,’ _BH, Bo, Lk, Lcd_; AO, CP.
[mōna]

mōnaðādl f. _morbus menstrualis_, BH.

mōnaðādlig _menstruous_, BH 78^5.

mōnaðblōd n. ‘_menstruum_,’ WW.

mōnaðbōt f. _penance lasting a month_, LL (278^11).

mōnaðfylen f. _time of full moon_, OEG.

mōnaðgecynd f. ‘_menstruum_,’ #Lcd#.

mōnaðlic _monthly, lunar_, #Gl#.

mōnaðsēoc I. _menstruous_, Æ. II. = mōnsēoc

mōnaðsēocnes f. _lunacy_, #Lcd# 1·170^4.

moncus = mancus  [[under “mancs”]]

mond = mand

mōndæg = mōnandæg

mōne f. = mōna

mōnelic _lunar_, Æ.

monetian _to despise_? #An# 746. [*manetian?]

+mong = +mang

monig == manig

mōnlic = mōnelic

monn == mann

mōnoð = mōnað

mōnsēoc _‘moonsick,’ lunatic, epileptic_, _MtR_.

mont = munt

mōnð = mōnað

monuc = munuc

mōr m. _‘moor,’ morass, swamp_, _B_; Mdf: _hill, mountain_, AO.

morað (ō?) n. _sweet boiled wine with herbs_. [_L._ moratum]

mōrbēam (ā, u) m. _mulberry tree, bramble_, _VPs_ (ā). [v. ‘_more_’]

mōrberie f. _mulberry (fruit)_, ÆL 25^576.

more f. _carrot, parsnip_, _Lcd, WW_. [‘_more_’]

moreð = morað

mōrfæsten n. _moor-fastness_, #Chr#.

mōrflēoge f. _‘cariscus,’ a kind of fly_, NC 310.

morgen (a, e) m. ds. morgenne _‘morn,’ morning, forenoon_, _Æ, B, MtL,
VPs_: _sunrise_, _B_: _morrow_, CP. on mor(gen)ne (1) _in the morning_,
(2) _to-morrow_.

morgenceald † _chill at morn_.

morgencolla m. _morning terror_, #Jud# 245.

morgendæg m. _morrow_: _morning_.

morgendlic = morgenlic

morgendrenc m. _morning drink_, #Lcd#.

morgengebedtīd f. _morning prayer_, #Guth# 40^25.

morgengifu f. _gift by a husband to his wife the morning after the
wedding_, _BC, WW_. [‘_moryeve_’]

morgenlēoht n. _dawn, morning_.

morgenlic _matutinal, morning_: _of the morrow_. morgenlica dæg
_to-morrow_.

morgenlong _lasting a morning_, B 2895.

morgenmæsse f. _morning mass, first mass_, ANS 84·2.

morgenmete m. _morning meal_.

morgenrēn m. _morning rain_, #Az# 82.

morgensēoc _sad at morn_, #An# 241.

morgenspǣc f. _regular meeting of a guild on the morrow after the
guild-feast_, _TC_. [‘_morn-speech_’]

morgenspell ‡ n. _news published at morn_.

morgensteorra m. _morning star_, _Bo_. [‘_morn-star_’]

morgenswēg m. _cry at morn_, B 129.

morgentīd (a^1, e^1) f. _morning_.

morgentīdlic _matutinal_, #BPs# 129^6.

morgentorht _bright at morn_, #An# 241.

morgenwacian _to rise early_, WW.

mōrhǣð f. _mountain-heath_, #PPs# 82^10.

mōrheald _heathy, marshy_? #Ex# 61.

mōrhop n. _moor-swamp_, B 450.

mōrig _marshy_, Æ.

mōrland n. _‘moor-land,’ mountain-waste_, _LkL_.

morne ds., mornes gs. of morgen.

morod, moroð = morað

mōrsceaða m. _robber from mountain heights_, NG.

mōrsecg mn. _sedge_, #Lcd# 3·140^25.

mōrseohtre f. _marshy ditch_, NC 310.

mōrstapa m. _traverser of moors_, #Run# 2.

mortere m. _mortar_. [_L._ mortarium]

morð nm. _death, destruction, homicide, ‘murder,’_ _AO_; Æ: _deadly
sin_. [‘_murth_’]

morð- = morðor-

morðcrundel mn. _barrow raised over a dead body_? _deadly pool_?
_corpse-pit_? KC 3·23´.

morðdǣd f. _murder, deadly sin, crime_, Æ.

morðor nm., gs. morðres (mp. morðras) _deed of violence_, _‘murder,’
homicide, manslaughter_, _B, Bl_: _mortal sin, crime_: _injury,
punishment, torment, misery_.

morðorbealu † n. _violent death, murder_.

morðorbed ‡ n. _bed of death (by violence)_.

morðorcofa m. _prison_, #An# 1006.

morðorcræft m. _murderous crime_, #An# 177.

morðorcwalu f. _murder_, NC 310.

morðorcwealm m. _murder, death_, #GnE# 152.

morðorhete m. _blood-feud_, B 1105.

morðorhof n. _place of torment_, #El# 1303.

morðorhūs n. _house of torment_, #Cr# 1625.

morðorhycgende ‡ _with murderous thoughts_.

morðorlēan n. _retribution for sin_, #Cr# 1612.

morðorscyldig _guilty_, #An# 1601.

morðorslaga m. _homicide, murderer_, NG.

morðorslagu f. _homicide, murder_, NG.

morðorslege m. _homicide, murder_, LL (148^14).

morðorsleht (morðsliht) m. _slaughter, murder_.

morðorwyrhta m. _murderer_.

morðslaga (Æ) = morðorslaga

morðsliht = morðorsleht

morður = morðor

morðweorc n. _deadly work, act which causes death, murder_, LL.

morðwyrhta = morðorwyrhta

moru f. _parsnip, carrot_ (= more).

mōrwyrt f. _moor-wort_, #Lcd# 48b.

mōs n. I. _bog, marsh_, _BC_. [‘_moss_’] II. n. _food, victuals_.
[_Ger._ mus]

mōst, mōste v. *mōtan.

mot n. _mote, speck, atom_.

mōt I. (±, usu. +) n. _‘moot_’ (‘_gemot_’), society, assembly, court,
council_, _Chr, MtL_; Mdf. +m. wyrcan _to take counsel_: _litigation_,
_Bo_: (+) _conflict, encounter_. II. f. _toll, tribute_, MkL. [_Ger._
maut] III. pres. sg. of *mōtan.

±mōtærn (e^2) n. _place of meeting, court-house_, AO.

mōtan* swv. pres. 1, 3 sg. mōt, pres. 2 sg. mōst, pres. pl. mōton, pret.
mōste _(may), to be allowed, be able to, have opportunity to, be
compelled to, must_, _Æ_; AO, CP. mōste ic _would that I might_!
[‘_mote_’]

+mōtan = mētan

mōtbell f. _bell for summoning a moot_, _LL_. [v. ‘_moot_’]

±mōtbeorh m. _hill of meeting_, BC.

mōtere m. _public speaker_, _WW_. [‘_mooter_’]

mōtern = mōtærn

mōtgerēfa m. _moot-reeve, chairman of a moot_, EC 342´.

±mōthūs n. _moot-hall, place of assembly_, _WW_; W. [‘_moothouse_’]

±mōtian _to speak to, converse with, address, harangue_, _Æ_: _debate,
argue, plead_, _Hex_. [‘_moot_’]

mōtlǣðu sbpl. _courts, assemblies_? TC 433^22.

+mōtlēah m. _meadow of meeting_, BC.

+mōtmann m. _orator_, WW 164^35; 310^29.

+mōtstede m. _place of meeting_, #Soul# 152.

±mōtstōw f. _place of meeting, forum_.

mōtung f. _conversation, discussion_, _OEG_. [‘_mooting_’]

mōtweorð (u^2) _qualified to attend the moot_, EC 343´.

moðfreten _moth-eaten_.

mōðor = mōdor

moððe f. ‘_moth_,’ _MtL_ (mohðe).

mucgwyrt f. _artemisia, mugwort_, #Lcd#.

mucxle = muscelle

mūdrica = mȳderce  [[headword spelled “myderce”]]

mūga m. _‘mow,’ heap of corn_, _Æ_.

mugan* = magan

mugwyrt = mucgwyrt

mūha (_Cp_) = mūga

mūl m. _mule_. [_L._ mulus]

mūlhyrde m. _mule-keeper_, #ÆGr# 35^5.

multon pret. pl. of meltan.

+mun (w. g.) _mindful, remembering_, AO 48^11.

±munan (usu. +) pres. 1, 3 sg. man (mon), 2 manst, pl. munon, pret.
munde swv. _to think about, be mindful of, remember_, _Bl, Jul, Lk_; Æ,
AO, CP: _consider_. [‘_i-mune_’]

mund f. I. † _hand_: _palm (of the hand, as a measure)_: _trust,
security, protection, guardianship_, Æ: _protector, guardian_: _the
king’s peace_: _fine for breach of the laws of protection or
guardianship of the king’s peace_, v. LL 2·555; 641. [cp. _Ger._
vormund] II. m. _money paid by bridegroom to bride’s father,
bridegroom’s gift to bride_, #Cr# 93. III. = mynd

mundbeorg m. _protecting hill_, #PPs# 124^2.

mundberd = mundbyrd

mundbora m. _protector, preserver, guardian, advocate_, Æ: _prefect_.

mundbryce (i^2) m. _breach of the laws of protection or guardianship_,
LL: _fine for the breach of such laws_.

mundbyrd f. _protection, patronage, help_: _fine for a breach of the
peace_, LL.

+mundbyrdan _to protect_, #Bo#.

mundbyrdnes f. _protection_: _security, independence_: _protector,
guardian, advocate_.

mundbyre = mundbyrde (ds. of mundbyrd)

mundcræft m. _protecting power_, #Lcd# 1·384^13.

munde v. munan.

+munde = +mynde

mundgripe † m. _hand-grasp_.

mundheals f. _protection_? #Cr# 445.

±mundian _to protect, watch over, act as guardian of_, Æ.

mundiend m. _protector_, TC 525^8.

mund-lēow, -lēu, -lāu. f. _wash-hand basin_, WW. [_ON._ munnlaug]

mundrōf _strong with the hands_, #Rd# 84^3.

mundwist f. _guardianship, protection_, NC 310.

munec == munuc

munecian _to make a monk of_, _LL_. [‘_monk_’]

munetere = mynetere

mungung = mynegung

+muning f. _remembrance_.

munt m. _mountain, hill_, Æ, AO, CP. [_L._ montem]

muntælfen f. _mountain-nymph_, WW 189^4.

muntclȳse f. _mountain prison_, W 84#h#.

muntland n. _hill-country_, Lk 1^39.

munuc m. ‘_monk_,’ _BH, RB_ (e^2): (_used also of women_), A 27·255.
[_L._ monachus]

munucbehāt n. _monastic vow_, HL 18^81,95.

munuccild n. _child intended for monastic life_, Æ.

munuccnapa m. _young monk_, GD.

munucgegyrela m. _monastic garb_, BH 34^27.

munuchād m. _monastic orders, the monastic life_, _Æ, BH_; CP.
[‘_monkhood_’]

munuchēap m. _company of monks_.

munucian (e^2) _to make a monk of_, _LL_. [‘_monk_’]

munuclic _monkish, monastic_, _BH_; Æ. adv. -līce. [‘_monkly_’]

munuclīf n. _monastic life_, Æ: _cloister, monastery_, Æ, AO.

munucrēaf n. _monk’s garb_, GD 27^17.

munucregol m. _monastic rule, mode of life_, Æ: _a body of monks under a
certain rule_, TC 544^12.

munucscrūd n. _monk’s garb_, ÆP 142^5.

munucstōw f. _place of monks_, BH 236^25.

munucðēaw m. _monastic rule_, ANS 84·7.

munucwīse f. _fashion of a monk_, ÆL 6·247.

mūr m. _wall_. [_L._ murus]

mūrbēam = mōrbēam

mūrberie = mōrberie

murc _dismal, wretched_, #PPs# 145^6. [myrce]

murcian _to murmur, complain, repine, grieve_, CP.

murcn- = murc-

murcnere m. _complainer_, RB 21^5.

murcung f. _complaining, lamentation, sorrow_, CP.

murge = myrge

murnan^3 (and wv.) _to care, be anxious or fearful about_, _An, Bo,
Wald_: _‘mourn,’ sorrow, bemoan_, _Wy_: _long after_, _An_ 37.

murra = myrra

murre = myrre

mūs f. gs. mūs, mūse, nap. mȳs ‘_mouse_,’ _Bo_; Æ; Mdf: _muscle (of the
arm)_, _WW_ 158^6.

mus-celle, -cule f. _shell-fish, mussel_. [_L._]

muscflēote f? _a small fly found in wine_ (must-flēoge? BT), WW 121^22.

muscle = muscelle

mūsepise f. _mouse-pea, vetch_, WW 148^35.

mūsfealle (a^2) f. _mouse-trap_, WW.

mūsfealu _mouse-coloured_, WW 448^9.

mūshafoc n. _mouse-hawk, buzzard_, WW.

musle = muscelle

musscel (#Gl#) = muscelle

must m. _‘must,’ new wine_, _Bo_; Æ. [_L._ mustum]

-mūtian v. be-m.

mūtung f. _‘mutuum,’ loan_, WW 449^30.

mūð m. _‘mouth,’ opening, door, gate_, _Æ, BH, CP, Mt_.

mūða m. _mouth (of a river)_, _estuary_, AO, #Chr#: (†) _entrance to a
house, door_.

mūðādl f. _mouth-disease_, WW.

mūðberstung f. _eruption of the mouth_, WW.

mūðbona m. _devourer_, B 2079.

mūðcoðu f. _mouth-disease_, WW.

mūðettan _to blab out, let out_, Æ (6^160).

mūðfrēo _free to speak_, #PPs# 11^4.

mūðhǣl n. _wholesome speech_, #Ex# 552.

mūðhrōf m. _palate_, OEG 332.

mūðlēas _mouthless_, #Rd# 61^9.

mūwa (_WW_ 348^6) = mūga

muxle = muscelle

myce? (ES 43·309), mycel (LWS) = micel

mycg (i) m. ‘_midge_,’ _Cp, Lcd, WW_.

mycgern (i) n. _internal fat, suet_, _WW_. [‘_midgern_’]

mycgnet n. _mosquito-net_, WW 183^13 (i).

mycl- = micl-

myd- = mid-

mydd n. _bushel_, AO 190^12. [_L._ modius]

myderce f. _money-box, chest_, Æ.

mygg (#Gl#) = mycg

mȳgð = mǣgð

myhtig = mihtig

mȳhð pres. 3 sg. of mīgan.

myl n. _dust_, JAW 32; ES 41·163. [_Ger._ müll]

mylc = meolc

mylcen adj. _of milk_.

myldan = miltan

-myldan v. be-m.

myle- = mylen-

mylen mf. ‘_mill_,’ _KC, LL, RB_; Mdf.

mylengafol n. _mill-tax, mill-rent_? NC 310.

mylenhwēol n. ‘_mill-wheel_,’ _Lcd_.

mylenscearp † _sharpened on the grindstone_.

mylenstān m. _grindstone_, _WW_. [‘_millstone_’]

mylentroh n. _mill-trough, mill-conduit_, WW.

mylenwaru f., mylenwer m. _mill-weir, mill-dam_, Ct.

mylenwyrd, myleweard m. _tenant of a (manorial) mill_, _WW_.
[‘_millward_’]

mylier (EC 179^1) = myle(n)wer?

mylisc, mylsc = milisc

mylma m. _retreat_? GPH 398^150.

myln = mylen

myltan = (1) meltan; (2) miltan

myltenhūs n. _brothel_, ES 9·39.

myltestre (e, i) f. _prostitute_, Æ. [_L._ meretricem]

myltestrehūs n. _brothel_, WW 186^2.

mymerian _to keep in memory, remember_, W 74^15.

+mynan = +munan

±mynd (usu. +) fn. _memory, remembrance_, _Æ, BH, Met_: _memorial,
record_, _Æ_: _act of commemoration_, _Bl, MH_: _thought, purpose_,
_Bl_. on +m. niman _to recollect_. [‘_mind_’]

+myndblīðe _memorial_, #EPs# 101^13; 134^13 (i).

+mynddæg f. _commemoration day, anniversary_, BH.

+mynde I. _mindful_, #El# 1064. II. _river-mouth_, BH 398^17
(v. JAW 31).

+myndewyrðe _worth mentioning_, BH 486^12.

±myndgian _to remember, be mindful of_: (w. g.) _remind_, _W_: _intend_:
_commemorate, mention_, _PPs_: _exhort, warn_: _demand payment_, LL 206,
1, 2. +myndgod _aforesaid_. [‘_ming_’]

myndgiend m. _one who reminds_, B 1105.

myndgung f. _admonition_, CP: _remembrance_.

±myndig _mindful_, _Mk_. se +myndiga _the aforesaid_. [‘_mindy_’]

+myndiglic = +myndlic

+myndiglicnes f. _remembrance_, #SPs# 101^13.

±myndlēas _foolish, senseless_, Æ.

+myndlic _memorable_. adv. -līce _by heart_, Æ.

+myndlȳst f. _madness_, ZDA 31^22.

+myndstōw f. _monument, tomb_.

+myndwyrðe = +myndewyrðe

myne I. † m. _memory, remembrance_: _feeling, affection, love, favour_.
m. witan _to love_: _purpose, desire, wish_: _memorial_. [†munan]
II. m. _minnow_, WW. III. = mene

+myne I. _mindful_, MtR 5^23. II. pres. subj. of +munan.

mynecen, mynecenu f. _female monk, nun_, _WW_; Æ. [‘_minchen_’; munuc]

mynegian = myndgian

mynegiendlic _hortatory_, CM 30.

mynegung f. _warning, admonition, exhortation_, Æ: _claim_.

mynelic _desirable_, #Wid# 4.

mynescilling = menescilling

mynet n. _coin, money_, _Cp, Lcd, MtR_. [‘_mint_’; _L._ moneta]

mynetcȳpa m. _money-changer_, ÆH 1·412.

mynetere m. _‘minter,’ coiner_, _Æ_: _money-changer_, _Mt_; Æ.

mynetian _to coin_, LL 158[14].

mynetīsen n. _coinage_, ÆL 23^447.

mynetslege m. _minting, coinage_, ÆL 23^475.

mynetsmiððe f. _mint_, LL 158[14,1].

myng- = myneg-, myndg-

mynian _to intend, be impelled_: _direct oneself towards an object_, AS
1^9 (e).

mynig- = myneg-

mynit = mynet

mynle f. _desire_, #Met# 26^67.

mynnan = mynian

mynster (æ^2) n. _monastery, nunnery_, _BH_: _mother-church_,
_‘minster,’ cathedral_, _LL_. [_L._ monasterium]

mynsterbōc f? _minster-book_, NC 310.

mynsterclǣnsung f. _purification of a minster_.

mynsterclūse f. _monastic enclosure, stall, cell_, CM 22.

mynsterfæder m. _abbot_, GD 293^1.

mynsterfǣmne f. _nun_, BH 20^19.

mynstergang m. _act of joining an order of monks_, LL (146^23)

mynstergēat n. _monastery gate_, GD 145^2.

mynsterhām m. _monastic house, monastery_.

mynsterhata m. _persecutor of monasteries_, W 165^28.

mynsterlic _monastic_, Æ. adv. -līce.

mynsterlīf n. _monastic life_, Æ: _cloister, monastery_.

mynstermann m. _monk_, Æ.

mynstermunuc m. _monk who lives in a monastery (i.e. not an
anchorite)_, Æ.

mynsterprafost m. _provost of a monastery_, TC 434^4.

mynsterprēost m. _priest of a church or minster_, LL (254^8).

mynsterscīr f. _control of a monastery_, BH 458^11.

mynsterstede m. _monastic buildings_, GD 182^19.

mynsterstōw f. _place of a minster, town_, BH 160^16.

mynstertimbrung f. _building of a monastery_, GD 147^11.

mynsterðēaw m. _monastic custom_, BH 452^12.

mynsterðegnung f. _monastic service_, RB 85^17.

mynsterwīse f. _custom of a monastery_.

±myntan _to intend, determine, resolve_, _Æ, Bo_: _think_, _B, Jud_:
_bring forth_, #Sc# 215^1: _give up to_, LL 400[3]. [‘_mint_,’
‘_i-munte_’]

myranhēafod n. _mare’s head (a nick-name)_, #Chr# 1010#e#.

Myrce, Myrcan = Mierce

myrce == mirce

myre (Æ, AO) = miere

myrenæddra = merenæddra

myrgan _to be ‘merry,’ rejoice_, _PPs_.

myrge adj. (e, i, u) _pleasing, agreeable_, _Æ, Bo, Met_ (e): _pleasant,
sweet_, _DHy_ (e). adv. myriglīce _pleasantly, melodiously_, GD 286^1.
[‘_merry_’]

myrgelēoð n. _epitaph_? BH 94^12 (#b#).

myrgen I. f. _joy, pleasure_, #Met# (Introd.) 5. II. == morgen

myrgnes f. _melody_, WW 33^31.

myrgð (e, i), myrhð f. _‘mirth,’ joy, pleasure, sweetness (of sound)_,
_Æ, Bo_.

myrig- = myrg-

mȳrlic = mǣrlic

myrr- = mierr-

myrra I. m. _sweet cicely (plant)_. II. (u) f. ‘_myrrh_,’ _Æ_.

myrre f. = myrra

myrrelse f. _offence, scandal, stumbling-block_, #Jul# 338.

myrten I. n. _flesh of an animal which has died of itself, carrion_, LL.
II. adj. _dead (of animals which have not been killed)_, LL.

myrð = myrgð

myrðra m. _homicide, murderer_.

-myrðran, -myrðrian v. for-, of-m.  [[under “ofmyrðrian”]]

myrðrung f. _parricide, murder_, WW 467^21.

myrw- = mearuw- (v. mearu)

mȳs v. mūs.

myscan _to afflict_, #PPs#.

+myscan _to defile_, OEG 17^47.

mysci sbpl. _flies_, #PPs# 104^27.

mȳse = mēse

mytting = mitting

+mȳðe n. (usu. pl.) _mouth, confluence, junction of two streams_,
BH, Ct.

myx = meox

myx- = mix-




=N=


nā (ō) adv. conj. _not, no, not at all, not even, never, by no means_,
Æ, AO, CP. nā ðæt ān _not only_. nā...nā _neither...nor_. ne nā _nor_.
nā mā _no more_, _ÆGr, Bl_. [‘_no mo_’] nā māre sb. _nothing more_, _Bo,
Mk_. [‘_no more_’]

nab- = naf-

nabban anv. pres. 1 sg. næbbe, 2 næfst, 3 nafað, næfð, pl. nabbað,
næbbað; pret. næfde (v. habban) _not to have, to lack, be without_, _Bo_
(+næfd), _Jn_; AO, CP. [v. ‘_have_’]

naca † m. _vessel, boat, ship_. [_Ger._ nachen]

naced = nacod

±nacian, +nacodian _to lay bare, strip_.

nacod, nacud (æ) (+) I. adj. _‘naked,’ nude, bare_, _Æ_; CP: _empty_:
_not fully clothed_. II. f. _nakedness_.

nacodnes (æ) f. _nakedness_, Æ.

næ adv. = ne

næbbað, næbbe v. nabban.

nǣbre = nǣfre

næcad (_Cp_ 499#e# ‘_exserta_’) = nacod

±nǣcan (hnǣcan) _to kill_, Æ.

næced == nacod

næcedu f. _nakedness_, MFH 169.

næct = niht

nædder- = nǣder-

nædderfāh _snake-coloured_, HL 15^183.

næddre (CP) = nǣdre

næddrewinde f. _adder-wort_, WW 287^16.

nǣderbīta m. _ichneumon_, WW.

nǣdl (ē) f. ‘_needle_,’ _Soul, WW_; Æ.

nǣdre (ē) f. _‘adder,’ snake, serpent, viper_, _Mt_; AO, CP.

nǣdrewyrt (der) f. _adder-wort_.

næfde pret. 3 sg. of nabban.

næfebor (A 9·263^3) = nafūgar  [[headword spelled “nafogār”]]

næfig (NG) = næftig

næfne = nefne

nǣfre (ē) adv. ‘_never_,’ _B, Bo, Bl, G_; CP. [ne, ǣfre]

næfst v. nabban.

næft f. _need, want, poverty_, #Sc# 157^3,7.

næftcyrrend _not returning_, CP 77^39. [neft, ne eft]

næftig _poor_, #Sc# 190^1.

±nǣgan I. † (ē) (often followed by wordum) _to accost, speak to_. II. =
hnǣgan

nægel = nægl

nægen = ne mægen

nægl m. _‘nail,’ peg_, _AO_; Æ: _finger-nail, toe-nail, claw_, _Æ_:
_plectrum_, #Wyrd# 84: (in comp.) _handle_.

nægledbord † _with nailed sides_.

nægledcnearr m. _nail-fastened vessel_, †#Chr# 937.

nægledcræt n. _iron chariot_.

nægledsinc n. _studded vessel_, B 2023.

±næglian _‘to nail,’ fasten with nails_, _MtLR_; Æ.

næglsex n. _knife for cutting the nails_, _WW_. [seax; v. ‘_nail_’]

næglspere n. _(sharp) nail_, Cp 260#u#.

nǣh = nēah

nǣhsta = nīehsta

næht (_NG, VPs_) == niht

nǣht = nāht

nællæs = nealles

næm = neom

nǣm f. _taking, receiving_, NC 311.

+nǣman _to take away_, #Guth# 14^11.

nǣmel _receptive_, NC 311. [= numol]

nǣming f. _bargain, contract_, WW 180^17.

næmne = nefne

+næmnian (LL 455´) = nemnian

næmniendlic = nemniendlic

nǣnig pron. _no one, none, not any, no_ (used as sb. with gen. and as
adj.). nǣnige ðinga (S 320) adv. _not at all, in no wise_. [ne, ǣnig]

nǣnig-wuht, -uht _in no wise, nothing_.

nǣniht (NG) = nānwiht

nǣnne v. nān.

nǣp m. _turnip, rape_, _Cp, Lcd_. [‘_neep_’]

nǣpsǣd n. _rape seed_, #Lcd#.

næpte = nefte

nǣre, nǣron (Æ, AO, CP) = ne wǣre, ne wǣron

nǣrende ptc. _not being_. [ne, wesan]

nǣrra = nēara

næs I. (AO, CP) = ne wæs. II. adv. _not, not at all_, CP. [= nalæs] III.
= næss. IV. pret. 3 sg. of nesan.

næsc _fawn-skin_, #Gl, Lcd#.

næse (NG) = nese

næsgristle f. _nose-gristle_, #Gl#.

næs-hlið n. dp. -hleoðum _declivity, slope (of a headland)_, B 1428.

næss (e), næssa m. _‘ness,’ cliff, headland, cape_, _B_: (†) _earth,
ground_.

+næstan _to contend_ (wið), #Rd# 28^10.

næster _‘caucale,’ an umbelliferous plant_? _wild carrot_? WW 202^1.

næsðȳrl n. _nostril_, Æ.

±nǣtan _to annoy, afflict, press upon, subdue_, CP.

nǣting f. _blaming_, CP 353^11.

nǣðl = nǣdl

nafa I. m. = nafu. II. = ne hafa imperat. of nabban.

nafað pres. 3 sg. of nabban.

nafela m. _navel_, Æ, AO.

nafeða m. _nave (of a wheel)_, WW 106^27.

nafogār m. ‘_auger_,’ _Gl, WW_.

nafu f. _nave (of a wheel)_, #Bo#.

nafula = nafela

nafulsceaft f. _navel_, #Lcd# 3·124^22.

+nāg _striking, pressing_? #Rim# 57?

nāgan* pres. 3 sg. nāh; pret. nāhte, nāhton _not to owe, not to be
bound, not to be allowed, to have no right to, not to own, not to have,
to lose, be unable to_, AO. nāhte _ought not_. [ne, āgan]

nāht (ǣ, āu, ō) I. n. _‘naught,’ nothing_, _Æ_: _wickedness,
evil-doing_, _CP_ (nāwht). instr. nāhte w. comparatives = _nothing_. II.
_useless, bad, poor_. III. adv. _not, not at all_, CP. [nā, wiht]

nāhte v. nāgan.

nāhtfremmend m. _evil-doer_, #PPs# 58^2.

nāhtgītsung [nāuht-] f. _wicked avarice_, CP 333^5.

nāhtlic _good for nothing, worthless, of no avail_, #Chr# 979#e#. adv.
-līce _wickedly, badly_, _VPs_ (ō). [‘_noughtly_’]

nāhtnes f. _worthlessness_, #Chr# 449#a#.

nāhtscipe f. _worthlessness_, #Chr# 449#e#.

nāh-wǣr, -wǣrn adv. _‘nowhere,’ in no case, never, not at all_, _A, Æ,
Bl_; GD (ō).

nāhwæðer pron. and conj. _neither_, _CP_. [‘_nauther_’]

nāhwār = nāhwǣr

nāhwider _‘no-whither,’ nowhere_, _Bo, RB_.

nāhwonan adv. _from nowhere_.

nalæs, nalas, nales (AO, CP), nalles (CP), nals = nealles

nalde (N, #VPs#) = nolde pret. of *nyllan.

nam I. pret. 3 sg. of niman. II. (N) = ne eom

nām f. _(legal) seizure_, LL.

nama (o) m. ‘_name_,’ _Æ_; AO, CP: _noun_, #ÆGr#.

nambōc (o) f. _register of names (in a book)_, WW 342^11.

nambred (o) n. _register of names (on a tablet)_, WW 499^40. [_Ger._
brett]

namcūð _well-known, celebrated_, Æ.

namcūðlīce adv. _by name_, Æ.

±namian _to ‘name,’ mention_, _Æ_: _nominate, appoint_.

nammǣlum adv. _by name_, OEG 880.

+namna m. _companion_, #Rd# 53^3; 54^13?

namnian _to address, invoke_, Æ.

nāmon pret. pl. of niman.

nāmrǣden f. _learning_, WW 431^8.

nān as. nǣnne, nānne I. pron. and adj. _‘none,’ not one, no_, _Bl, Chr,
Ct, HL_. nāna ðinga _on no account_. II. sb. w. g. _none, no one,
nothing_, _Bo, Jn, RB_. [nē, ān]

nān-wiht, -(w)uht I. n. (often w. g.) _nothing, naught_, AO, CP. II.
adv. _not at all, in no wise_.

nāp pret. 3 sg. of nīpan.

nard m. _spikenard, unguent_. [_L._ nardus]

nart (_JnL_) = neart

naru = nearu

nas = næs = ne wæs  [[form of “wesan”]]

nāst (= ne wāst) v. nytan.

nasðȳrl = næsðȳrl

nasu = nosu

nāt (_Bo, Jn_) = ne wāt, v. nytan.

nāteshwōn (Æ), nāteðæshwōn adv. _not, not at all, by no means_.

nāthwā adj. pron. _some one (nescio quis)_.

nāthwǣr adv. _somewhere or other_.

nāthwæt pron. _something or other_.

nāt-hwilc, -hwylc adj. pron. (indef.) _(I know not which), some one or
other_.

nātōhwōn, nātōðæshwōn = nāteshwōn

nāðēlǣs (AO) = nāðȳlǣs

nāðer (Æ, AO, CP), nāðor (Æ) = nāhwæðer

nāðinc n. _nothing_, HL 18^48.

nāðȳlǣs _notwithstanding, nevertheless_, AO (ē^2).

nāuht = nāht

nāwa adv. _never_, #Lcd# 94b. [ne, āwa]

nāwer = nāhwǣr

nāwērn [= nāhwǣrn] adv. _nowhere_, WW.  [[under “nāhwǣr”]]

nāwht, nāwiht = nāht

nāwðer = nāhwæðer

nāwuht (CP) = nāwiht, nāht  [[under “nāwht”]]

ne I. adv. _not, no_, Æ, CP. II. conj. _neither, nor_, Æ, CP.

nēa- = nēah-

nēad = nīed

nēad- v. also nīed-, nȳd-.

nēadclamm n. _necessity, extremity_, #LPs# 106^28.

nēadcofa m. _prison_, #An# 1311.

nēadgafol n. _tax, tribute_, LL.

nēadgewuna m. _enforced custom_, WW 221^8.

nēadgylda m. _debtor_, WW 221^10.

nēadhād m. _compulsion, force_, WW 480^21.

nēadhǣs f. _order which one must obey_, LL 12.

±nēadian _to compel, force, constrain, urge, impel_, Æ.

nēadignes f. _obligation_, OEG 2106.

nēadinga (AO), nēadlunga = nēadunga

nēadðearflic _necessary, useful_. adv. -līce, #ÆGr#.

nēadðearfnes f. _opportunity, occasion_, #LPs# 9^22.

nēadðing n. _necessary thing_, RB 57; ÆP 13^7?

nēadung f. _compulsion_, Æ.

nēadunga, nēadunge adv. _compulsorily, forcibly_, Æ.

nēadwīs _needful, fitting, due_, Æ. adv. _of necessity_, Æ.

nēadwīsnes f. _necessity_, OEG 2396.

nēadwīte n. _inevitable punishment_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

nēadwraca m. _avenger by necessity_, TC 611^29.

nēah I. (e, i) [comp. nēara, superl. nīehsta q.v.] adj. _‘near,’ nigh,
close_, _BH_; AO, CP: _late_. II. adv. _‘near,’ nigh, about, almost,
nearly, lately_, _AO, Bo, G, Lcd, Met_, _etc._; CP. nēar and nēar
_nearer and nearer_. æt nīehstan _next, at length, finally_. III. prep.
w. d. _near, close to_: _according to_, AO.

+nēah I. † _sufficiency, abundance_. II. pres. 3 sg. of +nugan.

nēahbūend m. _neighbour_, #Rd# 26^2.

nēahceaster f. _nearest town_, BH 52^27 (nēh-).

nēahcyrice f. _neighbouring church_, GD.

nēahdǣl m. _neighbourhood_, GD 71^30.

nēahdūn f. _neighbouring hill_, #Nar# 14^6.

nēahēa f. _neighbouring river_, #Nar# 22^9.

nēahēaland n. _neighbouring island_, MH 84^17.

nēahfæder m. ‘_vicinus pater_,’ GD 179^7.

nēah-feald, -fealdlic (GD) _intimate_.

nēahfrēond (ē^1) m. _near friend, near kinsman_, #Guth# 56^22.

nēahgangol (w. d.) _placed near_, ÆL 23^131.

nēahgebūr m. ‘_neighbour_,’ _CP_.

nēahgebȳren (nēhhe-) f. _neighbour_, LkL 15^9.

nēahgebȳrild (nēhe-) m. _neighbour_, LkL 15^9.

nēahgehūsa (ē) m. _neighbour_, #JVPs#.

±neah-he, -hi(g)e (usu. +) _sufficiently_: _abundantly_: _often,
frequently_: _earnestly_.

nēahhebūr = nēahgebūr

+neahhelīce (nehl-) _sufficiently, frequently, usually_, LL, #Guth#.

nēahhergung f. _war close at hand_.

neah-hie, -hige = neahhe

+nēahian _to draw near to_, #LPs# 90^10.

nēahlǣcan = nēalǣcan

nēahland n. _neighbourhood_, GD 69^28.

nēah-mǣg m. nap. -māgas _near relation_.

nēahmǣgð f. _neighbouring tribe_, BH.

nēahmann m. _neighbour_, BH.

nēahmunt m. _neighbouring mountain_, GD.

nēahnes f. _nearness, neighbourhood_, BH.

nēahnunnmynster _neighbouring convent_, BH 254^10.

nēahsibb I. adj. _related_. II. f. _affinity, relationship_.

nēahsta = nīehsta

nēahstōw f. _neighbourhood, place near_.

neaht (_Met_) = niht

nēahtīd f. _approaching time_, BH 290^29.

nēahtūn (ē) m. _neighbouring town or village_.

nēahðēod f. _neighbouring nation_, AO.

nēahwæter n. _neighbouring piece of water_, #Nar# 22^24.

+nēahwian (ē) _to draw near, cleave to_, NG.

nēahwudu m. _neighbouring wood_, GD 229^20.

±nēalǣcan (w. d.) _to draw near, approach_, _Æ_; AO, CP: _be near_, GD
85^9: _cling to_, #CPs# 136^6. [‘_nehleche_’; nēah, lǣcan]

nēalǣcung f. _approach, access_, Æ.

nēalic (ē) _near, neighbouring_. adv. -līce _nearly, about_, _Bl_; CP.
[‘_nighly_’]

nealles adv. _not, not at all, by no means_, CP.

neam = neom

nēam- = nēahm-

nēan adv. _from near by_: _close at hand, near_: _nearly, about_.

+nēan = +nēhwian  [[under “nēahwian”]]

neap = hnæpp

nēar comp. of nēah, adv. _near, nearer_, AO.

+near = +ner

nēara, nēarra (AO), comp. of nēah, adj. _later, latter, nearer_.

neara- = nearo-

nearo (AO) = nearu

nearobregd f. _crafty trick_, #Jul# 302.

nearocræft m. _skill in enclosing_? B 2243.

nearofāh _intensely hostile_? B 2317.

nearogrāp f. _close grasp_, #Rd# 81^6.

nearolic _oppressive, straitened_, #El# 913. adv. -līce _narrowly,
closely, briefly, accurately_, Æ, CP: _strictly, stringently,
oppressively_.

nearonēd f. _urgent need_.

nearones f. _strait_, AO: _oppression_: _distress, anxiety, trouble_.

nearoðancnes f. _wickedness_, #LPs# 27^4.

nearoðearf f. _dire need_, #Cr# 69.

neart _art not_, _Bo_. [‘_nart_’; ne eart]

nearu I. † f? n? gs. nearu, near(o)we _strait, danger, distress,
difficulty_. n. ðrōwian _to be in straits_: _confinement, imprisonment_:
_prison, hiding place_. II. adj. _narrow, confined_, _AO, G_: _limited,
petty_: _causing or accompanied by difficulty, hardship, oppressive_,
_Bl, Rd_: _strict, severe_, CP. [‘_narrow_’]

nearu- = nearo-

nearusearu † f. _dark cunning_? _imprisonment_?

nearusorg f. _crushing distress_, #El# 1261.

nearuðanc m. _wickedness_, OEG.

nearuwrenc m. _evil trick_, #Mod# 44.

nearwe adv. _narrowly, closely, strictly_, _B, Met_: _carefully,
exactly_, _El_; CP: _oppressively, forcibly_: _artfully_: _anxiously_.
[‘_narrow_’]

nearwelīce = nearolīce

nearwian (±) _to force in, cramp, confine, afflict_: _become smaller,
shrink_.

nearxnewang = neorxnawang

nēasian (#VPs#) = nēosian  [[under “nēosan”]]

nēat n. _animal, beast, ox_, _CP, VPs_; pl. _cattle_. [‘_neat_’]

+nēat m. _companion, follower (esp. in war)_, _Chr, WW_: _dependant,
vassal, tenant who works for a lord_, v. LL 2·427. [v. ‘_geneat_’]

nēaten = nīeten

±nēatland n. _land of a dependant or vassal_, LL 196, 1, 1.

+nēatmann = +nēat

+nēatriht n. _regulations as to the tenure of_ ‘genēatland,’ LL 445[2].

+neatscolu f. _band of comrades_, #Jul# 684.

nēawest (AO, CP), nēawist (Æ) fm. _neighbourhood, nearness, presence_:
_society, cohabitation_. [nēah, wesan]

nēawung (N) f. _nearness_.

nebb n. _bill, beak, beak-shaped thing_, _Cp, Ph_: _nose_, _LL_: _face,
countenance, complexion_, _Æ, CP_. [‘_neb_’]

nebb- = neb-

nebbian _to retort upon, rebuke, confront_, ÆH 1·256.

nebcorn n. _pimple_, #Lcd# 1·118.

nebgebræc n. _nasal mucus_, WW.

nebsealf f. _antimony, face-powder_, OEG.

nebwlātful _barefaced, shameless_, OEG 2^317.

nebwlātung f. _barefacedness, impudence_, OEG 4306.

nebwlite m. _face, countenance_, Æ.

nechebūr = nēahgebūr

necti- = nihte-

ned = net(t)

nēd = (1) nīed; (2) nēod

nēd- (A) = nēad-, nīed-, nȳd-

nēdl = nǣdl

nēdre (#VPs#), neddre = nǣdre

nefa m. (±) _nephew_, Æ, AO: _stepson_: _grandson_.

nefene f. _granddaughter_: _niece_.

nefne = nemne

nēfre = nǣfre adv.

nefte f. _cat’s mint_. [_L._ nepeta]

nēfugol m. _bird of prey_, #Gen# 2158. [*nēo, _corpse_; _Goth._ naus]

nēgan = nǣgan

negled- = nægled-

nēh == nēah

+nehe, +nehh(ig)e = +neahhe

nēhst = nīehst

nēhsta = nīehsta

neht == niht

neirxnawong (N) = neorxnawang

nēista = nīehsta

nele (AO, CP) = nelle (Æ) pres. 1, 3 sing., nelt = pres. 2 sg. of
nellan.

nellan = *nyllan

nem-nan, -nian (±) _to name, call_, Æ, AO, CP: _enumerate_: _address,
speak to_: _nominate_: _mention, relate_, Æ. [nama]

nemne (A; = WS nymðe) conj. and prep. _unless, except, save, only_.

nemnian = nemnan

nemniendlic, nemnigendlic _naming, nominative_, #ÆGr# 22^10.

nemning f. _name_.

nemðe = nymðe

nenā (WW 252^1) = ne nā v. nā.

nēnig (#KGl#) = nǣnig

nēobedd † n. _corpse-bed, bed of death_. [_Goth._ naus]

nēod I. f. (ē, īe, ȳ) _desire, longing_: _zeal, earnestness_: _pleasure,
delight_. [_Goth._ niuðs] II. == nīed

nēode adv. (instr. of nēod) _eagerly, zealously, diligently_.

nēodfracu f. _yearning, greed_, #Met# 31^15 (v. ES 39·335).

nēodfrēond m. _kinsman, friend_, HL 18^150. [nīed]

nēodful _zealous, earnest_, #Jul# 720.

nēodhus n. _necessary chamber_, NC 312.

±nēodian (= ēa; impers. w. g.) _to be necessary, require, be required_,
_RB_. [‘_need_’]

nēodlaðu f. _wish_, B 1320.

nēodlīce adv. _eagerly, carefully, zealously, diligently_, Æ: (†)
_greatly_.

nēodlof n. _zealous praise_, #PPs# 148^12.

nēodspearuwa m. (_restless_?) _sparrow_, #PPs# 123^6.

nēodðearflic _necessary_, GD 148^6.

nēodweorðung f. _zealous honouring_, #PPs# 142^11.

neofa = nefa

nēol == neowol

nēo-lǣcan (#VPs#), -lēcan (_MtL_) = nēalǣcan

neom = ne eom (_am not_)

neoman = niman

nēomian _to sound sweetly_? #Wyrd# 84.

nēon = nīwan

+nēopan^2? _to engulf, overwhelm_, #Ex# 475.

nēor adv. = nēar

+neorð _contented_, Cp 544.

neorxnawang m. _Paradise_, Æ, CP; v. GK.

neorxnawanglic adj. _of paradise_, GD 179^1.

nēosan, nēosian (Æ) _to search out, find out, inspect_: (±) _visit, go
to_: _attack, visit with affliction_.

nēosīð m. _death_, #Mod# 55.

neosu = nosu

±nēosung f. _access_: _visitation, visit_, Æ.

nēotan^2 (usu. w. g.) _to use, have the use of, enjoy, employ_. [_Ger._
geniessen]

nēoten = nīeten

neoð-an, -ane (i) adv. _below, down, beneath, from beneath_, _Æ, Bl, Bo_
(-on). [‘_nethen_’]

neoðanweard adj. _lower_, WW 26^6 (io).

neoðe- = niðe-

neoðon == neoðan

neoðor = niðor

neoðor- = niðer-

neoðoweard = niðeweard

neoðra = niðera

nēow- = nīw-

neowel = neowol

nēowērno (WW 454^28) = nāwērn

neowol (i) _precipitous_: _headlong_: _prone, prostrate_, _Æ, Bo_ (i):
_obscure, deep down, abysmal_. [‘_nuel_’]

neowollic (i^1, e^2) _profound, deep_, ÆL 7^66.

neowolnes f. _depth, abyss, chasm_, Æ(i^1).

nēp only in phr. forðganges n. _without power of advancing_? #Ex# 469.

nēpflōd m. _neap-tide, ebb, low tide_, #Gl#.

nepte = nefte

±ner (ea) n. _refuge, protection_, ÆL, AO.

nēr = nēar

+ner-ednes, -renes f. _deliverance_.

nergend m. _saviour, preserver (Christ, God)_.

±nerian _to save, rescue, liberate_, Æ, AO, CP: _preserve, defend,
protect_. [_Goth._ nasjan; _Ger._ nāhren]

neriend, nerigend = nergend

nērra = nēar(r)a

+nerstede m. _refuge, sanctuary_, WW 186^23.

nerung f. _guard, protection_, OEG 5395.

nerw- = nearw-, nirew-

nerx- = neorx-

±nesan^5 (usu. +) _to escape from, survive, be saved_.

nese (æ) adv. _no_, Æ, CP. [ne, sī]

ness = næss

nest I. n. ‘_nest_,’ _MtL, Ph_; Æ: _young bird, brood_. II. n. _food,
provisions, victuals_.

nēst = nīehst

nēsta (#VPs#) = nīehsta

nestan _to spin_, NG.

nestig = nistig

nestlian _to make a nest_, #LPs# 103^16.

nestpohha m. _wallet_, MtL 10^10.

net = nett

net- = nyt-

neta m. _caul_, WW 266^20.

netan = nytan

netel, netele f. ‘_nettle_,’ _Lcd_.

nēten (_Bo, VPs_) == nīeten

netenes = nytennes

nētl (_Cp_) = nǣdl

netle (_Cp_) = netele  [[under “netle”]]

neton = nyton pres. pl. of nytan.

netrāp m. _snare, gin_, WW.

nett (y) n. ‘_net_,’ _Æ, Bo, WW_: _netting, network, spider’s web_,
_PPs_. [_Goth._ nati]

nette (y) f. _the net-like caul_, WW.

nettgern n. _knitting yarn_, EC 377. [gearn]

+nettian _to ensnare_, OEG 4596.

±nēðan _to venture on, dare, risk_, AO. [nōð]

+nēðedlic = +nīededlic

+neðerian = +niðerian

nēðing f. _boldness, daring_, AO.

nēðl (A) = nǣdl

neurisn f. _aneurism_, #Lcd#.

newesēoða (i^1) m. _pit of the stomach_? _bowels_? #Lcd#.

nēwest = nēawest

nēxt (LWS) == nīehst

nī- = nīg-, nīw-

nic, nice adv. _not I_ (= _no_). [ne, ic]

nicor (e^2) m. nap. nicras _water-sprite, sea-monster_, _B, Bl_:
_hippopotamus, walrus_, _Nar_. [‘_nicker_’]

nicorhūs n. _sea-monster’s dwelling_, B 1411.

nīd = nīed

nīd- = nēad-, nīed-, nȳd-

nīed I. (ē, ēa, ēo, ī, ȳ) fn. _‘need,’ necessity, compulsion, duty_, _B_
(ȳ), _BH_ (ē), _NG_ (ē); AO, CP: _errand, business_, _Æ_ (ēo):
_hardship, distress, difficulty, trouble, pain_, AO: _force, violence_,
_VPs_ (ē): _what is necessary_: _inevitableness_: _fetter_, #Deor# 5:
_name of the rune for =n=_. II. = nēod

nīed- v. also nēad-, nȳd-.

nīedan (ē, ī, ȳ) _to compel, force, urge, press_, _Æ_ (ȳ), _Bo, NG_ (ē);
AO, CP. [‘_need_’]

nīedbād (ē, ȳ) f. _toll, exaction, blackmail_.

nīedbādere (ē) m. _toll-collector_, TC 29^10.

nīedbehǣfdlic _necessary_, BH 396^24.

nīedbehǣfednes f. _necessity_, Æ (ē^1).

nīedbehēfe _needful, necessary_, Æ(y^1).

nīedbeðearf (y^3) _necessary_, CP 7^7.

nīede, nīedes (ēa, ēo, ī, ȳ) adv. (instr. and gs. of nīed) _of need,
needs, necessarily, compulsorily_, CP.

+nīededlic (ē) _compulsory_, BH 62^23 (v.l.).

nīedenga, nīedunga adv. _necessarily, by force, forcibly_, CP.

nīedfaru † f. _compulsory journey, death_.

nīedhǣmed (ē, ȳ) n. _rape_, LL.

nīedhīernes (e^1, e^2) f. _slavery_, DR 6^5.

nīedling m. _slave_, AO: _sailor_.

nīedmicel (ē) _urgent_.

nīednǣm f. _seizure_.

nīedscyld f. _moral necessity_, CP 57^6.

nīedsibb (ēa) f. _relationship_, OEG.

nīedðearf I. f. _need, necessity, compulsion, force_, CP: _distress_:
_want, thing needed_. II. adj. _necessary_.

nīedðearfnes (ēa, ē, ȳ) f. _need, necessity_: _compulsion_: _distress,
trouble_.

nīedðēow (ē, ȳ) m. _slave_.

nīedðrafung f. _reproof_, CP 297^22.

nīedwǣdla m. _poor wretch_, #Gen# 929.

nīehst I. adv. (superl. of nēah) _most nearly, in closest proximity_:
_last (in time)_, _Bl, Gen_ (ē). II. adj. _latest, last_, _Æ, Jud, VPs_
(ē): _nearest, ‘next,’_ _CP, Chr, KC, MkL_ (ē). æt nīehstan _at last,
next_.

nīehsta mf. _closest friend_, _CP_: (±) _neighbour_, _MkL, VPs_: _next
of kin_, _LL_. [‘_next_’]

nieht (CP) = niht

nierwan = nearwian

nīeten (ē, ēo, ī, ȳ) n. _small animal, beast, cattle_, _Bo, Lcd_; AO,
CP. [‘_neten_’; nēat]

nīetencynn n. _kind of animal_.

nīetenlic _animal, brutish_, #Bo# 35^28 (ē). adv. -līce _like an
animal_, W 55^16 (ȳ).

nīetennes f. _brutishness_, Æ (ȳ).

nieðemest = niðemest

nieðer == niðer

nīewe = nīwe

nīfara m. _new comer, stranger_, #PPs# 38^15.

nifol _dark, gloomy_ [= neowol]

nift f. _niece_, _BH, Ep, TC_: _granddaughter_: _step-daughter_.
[‘_nift_’]

nīg- = nīw-

nigan == nigon

nīge- = nigo-

nīgecyrred _newly converted_, OEG 3447.

nīgefara = nīfara

nīgehalgod _newly consecrated (of a king)_, _newly crowned_, ÆL 18^326.

nīgehwyrfed _newly converted_, ÆL 5^126.

nigenda = nigoða

nīghworfen _newly converted_, ÆH 2·130^27.

nigon ‘_nine_,’ _A, Bl, Chr_; AO, CP.

nigonfeald ‘_ninefold_,’ _ÆGr_.

nigongylde _entitled to ninefold compensation_, LL 470[7].

nigonnihte _nine days old_, ANS 129·22.

nigontēoða ‘_nineteenth_,’ _Chr_: ‘_ninetieth_,’ OEG 2521 (nigen-).

nigontīene (ȳ^3) ‘_nineteen_,’ _A, Men_.

nigontig ‘_ninety_,’ _Lk_; CP.

nigontȳnlic _containing the number nineteen_.

nigonwintre _nine years old_, AO 186^10.

nigoða (y) ‘_ninth_,’ _Bl_; MH (y): _ninth part_, _Bl_.

nigoðe _ninthly_, LL 181[9].

nīgslȳcod ptc. _freshly smoothed, glossy_, MH 206^27.

nigun = nigon

nīh (#KGl# 55^25) = nēah

nihold (#Gl#), nihol = neowol

nīhst = nīehst

nīhsta = nīehsta

nihstig = nistig

niht (æ, e, ea, ie, y) f. (gs. also nihtes) ‘_night_’ (often used in
enumerations where mod. Eng. uses days); _darkness_, _BH, Bl, Cr, Lcd_;
AO, CP.

niht- = nyht-

nihtbealu n. _destruction by night_, B 193.

nihtbutorflēoge f. _beetle or moth which flies by night_, WW 121^13; A
8·450.

nihtēage _that can see at night_, WW.

nihteald _(night-old), that has happened yesterday_, LL.

nihtegale (a, æ, e) f. _nightingale_, _Cp_: _night-jar_. [‘_nightgale_’]

nihtēge = nihtēage

nihtegesa m. _nocturnal terror_, #PPs# 90^5.

nihtelic = nihtlic

nihterne adv. _by night_: _during a night_, #Lcd#.

nihternnes f. _night season_, #Lcd# 3·288^21.

nihtes (æ) adv. (gs. of niht) _by night_, Æ.

nihtfeormung † f. _shelter at night_.

nihtgenga † m. _night-goer, goblin_.

nihtgenge f. _night-prowler, hyæna_, WW.

nihtgerīm † n. _number of nights_.

nihtgild n. _night sacrifice or service_, #Gl#.

nihtglōm m? _gloom of night_, #Gu# 916.

nihthelm † m. _shades of night_.

niht-hræfn, -hrefn, -hremn m. _night-raven, night-jar_.

nihthrōc m. _night-raven_, #LPs# 101^7.

nihthwīl f. _space of a night_, W 147^9.

+nihtian _to become night, grow dark_, NC 295.

nihtlang _lasting through the night_, Æ. adv. -langes, Æ.

nihtlic _nocturnal, of the night, at night_, Æ, CP.

nihtnehstig _having fasted for a night_, #Lcd#.

nihtremn = nihthræfn

nihtrest f. _couch_, #Gen# 2863.

nihtrīm = nihtgerīm

nihtsang m. _compline_: _book of service for compline_.

nihtscadu (a^3) _night-shade (plant)_, WW 135^3.

niht-scūa † m., gs. -scu(w)an _shades of night_.

nihtslǣp m. _night’s sleep_, ÆL 23^442.

nihtsum = nyhtsum

nihtwacu f. _night-watching_, _Seaf_ 7. [‘_night-wake_’]

nihtwæcce f. _‘night-watch,’ vigil_, _Lk_.

nihtwaru f. _clothing for night_, RB 90^4.

nihtweard m. _guardian at night_, #Ex# 116.

nihtweorc n. _deed done at night_, B 827.

nīhð (MP 1·613) pres. 3 sg. of nēahwan.  [[variant of “nēahwian”?]]

nīhwyrfed (OEG 3138) = nīgehwyrfed

nīlǣred _newly initiated_, OEG 3138.

nile = nyle, pres. 1 sg. of *nyllan.

±niman^4 (eo, io, y) _to take, assume, undertake, accept, receive, get_,
_Bo, VPs_, _etc._: _hold, seize, catch, grasp, pluck up, carry off_,
_Bl_ (eo): _bear, carry, bring_: _betake oneself, go_, _Bo_: _contain_:
_suffer, tolerate_: _give_: (+) _grasp, comprehend_: (+) _take to wife_.
frið +n. _make peace_. hē hine genam _he collected himself, reflected_.
sige n. _gain victory_. on n. _take effect_, #Lcd#. [‘_nim_’]

-nimend, -nimendnes v. dǣl-n.

niming f. _action of taking_, _LkL_. [‘_nimming_’]

nimðe = nymðe

nīol = neowol

nīow- = nēow-

nip? sb. _rope_, GPH 399^451.

+nip _darkness, mist, cloud, obscurity_, Æ. [nīpan]

±nīpan^1 † _to grow dark, obscure_.

+nipful _dark, gloomy_, ES 39·347.

nirewett (nirw-) n. _narrowness_: _narrow place, defile, pass_, AO:
_hardness of breathing_.

nirwan = nearwian

nirwð f. _prison house_, WW 399^5. [nierwan]

nis (_Æ, Bo, VPs_) = ne is (_is not_). [‘_nis_’]

nisēoða = newesēoða

nīsoden ptc. _newly-boiled_, OEG 326.

nistan (_VPs_), nistian (_SPs_) _to build nests_. [‘_nest_’]

nistig adj. _fasting_, #Lcd#. [ne, wist]

nist-lan (_PPs_), -lian (_EPs_) (y) _to build nests_. [‘_nestle_’]

nit- = nyt-

nīten = nīeten

niton (_Bo_) = nyton v. nytan. [‘_niten_’]

nið n. _abyss_, #Sat# 634?

nīð m. _strife, enmity, attack, war_: _evil, hatred, spite_, _Bl, Cr,
VPs_; AO, CP: _oppression, affliction, trouble, grief_, AO. [‘_nith_’]

niðan = neoðan

nīðan _to hate_, GD 117^5.

niðas = niððas  [[headword spelled “nīððas”]]

nīðcwalu f. _violent death, destruction_, #Cr# 1258.

nīðcwealm ‡ m. _violent death, destruction_.

nīðdraca m. _hostile dragon_, B 2273.

niðemest v. niðera.

niðer (io, y) adv. _below, beneath_, _Æ, B, Bo_; AO, CP. [‘_nether_’]

niðera (eo, y) (comp.) adj. niðemest, nyðemest (superl.; positive not
found) _lower, under, lowest_, _Bo, WW_; CP. [‘_nether_’]

niðerāscūfan (ēo^4) _to push down_, Æ.

niðerāstīgan^1 _to descend_, Æ, CP.

niðerātredan^5 _to tread down, tread under foot_.

niðerbogen ptc. _bent down_, KC 4·72^1.

niðerdǣl m. _lower part_, #PPs# 138^12.

niðere adv. _below, down, low down_, _Bo_. [‘_nether_’]

niðerflōr f. _lower story_, GD 170^17.

niðergān (y^1) _to descend_, Æ.

niðergang (y) m. _descent_, #Lcd# 3·246^8.

niðerheald _bent downwards_, #Met# 31^23.

niðerhreosende (y) _falling down_, Æ.

niðerhryre (y^1) m. _downfall, precipitation_, #Sc# 229^12.

±niðerian (e, y) _to depress, abase, bring low, oppress_, _Jud, Lk,
VPs_; AO, CP: _condemn, accuse_. +nyðred _ignominious_, ÆL 23b^14.
[‘_nither_’]

+niðerigendlic (y) _deserving condemnation_, #Sc# 162^18.

niðerlic _low, low-lying, inferior, lowly_, CP.

niðernes (y) f. _deepness, bottom_, BH 212^21.

niðerra = niðera

niðerscēotende (y) _rushing downwards_.

niðerscyfe m. _rushing downwards, descent_, #HGl# 468.

niðersige (y^1) m. _going down_, #LPs#.

niðerstīgan = niðerāstīgan

niðerstige (y^1) m. _descent_.

niðertorfian _to throw down_, GPH 390.

niðerung f. _humiliation, downthrow, condemnation_, _BH_ (y), _OEG_.
[‘_nither_’]

+niðerung f. _abasement_, Æ: _condemnation_, Æ.

niðerweard adj. _directed downwards_. adv. -weardes.

niðeweard _situated beneath, low, nethermost_.

nīðful _envious, quarrelsome, ill-disposed, evil_, _Æ_. [‘_nithfull_’]

nīðfullīce _maliciously_, ÆH 1·46^25.

nīðgæst † (y^2) m. _hostile alien, fell demon_.

nīðgetēon n. _attack_, #Gen# 2068.

nīðgeweorc n. _evil deed_, B 683.

nīðgrama m. _anger, malice_, W 180^9.

nīðgrim † _fierce, hostile_.

nīðgripe m. _fierce grasp_, B 976? [or ? nȳd-]

nīðheard † (and #EPs# 27^4) _bold, brave in battle_.

nīðhell f. _hateful hell_, HL 15^150.

nīðhete † m. _hostility, evil intent_: _affliction, torment_: _foe_,
#An# 833?

nīðhycgende † _evil-scheming_.

nīðhȳdig (ē^2) _valorous_, B 3165.

nīðig _envious, malicious_, OEG p. 224n.

nīðing m. _wretch, villain, coward, outlaw_, _Chr, LL_. [‘_nithing_’]

+nīðla † m. _enemy_: _enmity, fierceness_ (? +nīðle).

nīðlīce adv. _abjectly_, OEG 744.

nīðloca m. _place of torment_, #Hell# 64.

niðor (eo, y) comp. adv. _lower_, Æ, CP.

nīðplega m. _battle, fight_, #An# 414.

niðr- = niðer-

nīðsceaða m. _foe, persecutor_, #Rd# 16^24.

nīðscipe m. _wickedness_, #LPs# 7^10.

nīðsele m. _hall of conflict_, B 1513.

nīðsynn f. _grievovs sin_, #Sat# 180.

nīððas † mpl. _men_.

nīðweorc n. _battle_, †#Chr# 973.

nīðwracu † f. _severe punishment_.

nīðwundor ‡ n. _dire wonder, fearful portent_.

nīwan (ēo) adv. _newly, lately_, Æ, AO.

nīwanācenned _new-born_, MH 170^12.

nīwancumen (WW) = nīwcumen

nīwane = nīwan

nīwbacen (nīg-) _newly baked_, Æ.

nīwcend _new born_, BH 144^23 (nīc-).

nīwcilct _newly whitewashed_, AO 286^30.

nīwcumen (nī(g)-) _neophyte_, RB.

nīwe (ēo, īe) I. (nīg-, nī-, in compounds) adj. _‘new,’ fresh, recent,
novel, unheard of, untried, inexperienced_, _Æ, AO, BH, NG, Ph, WW_; CP.
nīwan stefne _again_. II. adv. (_Bl_) = nīwan. [‘_new_’]

niwel == neowol

nīwerne (ȳ) _tender_, Æ.

niwesēoða = newesēoða

nīwian _to renew, restore_, _El, Lcd_. [‘_new_’]

niwiht = nāht

nīwlic (ȳ) _fresh_. adv. -līce _lately, recently_, _Æ, AO_. [‘_newly_’]

nīwlinga (ēo) _anew_, GD 266^28.

nīwnes f. _‘newness,’ novelty_, _BH_ (ēo).

niwol = neowol

nīwtyrwed _newly tarred_, B 295.

nīwung f. _rudiment_, OEG 914.

nīwunga (eo) adv. _newly, anew_.

nixtnig = nistig

nō (CP) = nā

noctern m? n? _nocturn (religious service)_, CM 220^561.

+nōg, +nðh I. adj. _enough, sufficient, abundant_, _An, Bo, RB_; CP:
_much, many_. II. adv. _sufficiently_, _Bo_: _fully, quite, abundantly_,
_Bo_. [‘_enough_’]

+nōgian _to be abundant_, NC 345.

nōh- = nāh-

nolde v. *nyllan.

nom pret. 3 sg. of niman.

nom-, nome- = nam-

non m. _title of senior monks_, RB.

nōn fn. (m. RB 73^14) _the ninth hour_ (= 3 p.m.), _B, BH, Lcd_: _nones
(service held at the ninth hour)_, _RB, WW_. tō nōnes _till three
o’clock_. [‘_noon_’; _L._ nona (hora)]

nōnbelle f. _noon-bell_.

nōngereord n. _meal after nones, dinner_, RB 74^8.

nōnmete m. _afternoon meal_, _Sol, WW_. [‘_noonmeat_’]

nonne = nunne

nōnsang m. _service at 3 p.m., nones_.

nōntīd f. _ninth hour_, _Æ, Bl_. [‘_noontide_’]

nōntīma m. _ninth hour_.

norð I. adj. comp. norð(er)ra, superl. norðmest _northern_, AO. II. adv.
comp. norðor _northwards_, _Chr, Met_: _in the north, ‘north,’_ _AO,
B, Bl_.

norðan adv. _from the north_, AO. be...norðan prep. (w. d.) _north
of_, AO.

norðanēastan adv. _from the north-east, north-easterly_, AO.

norðanēastanwind m. _north-east wind_, WW.

Norðanhymbre, Norðhymbre mp. _Northumbrians_, _Chr_: _Northumbria_.
[‘_Northumber_’]

norðanweard _northward_.

norðanwestan adv. _from the north-west, north-westerly_, AO.

norðanwestanwind m. _north-west wind_, WW 8^10.

norðanwind m. _north wind_.

norðdǣl m. _north quarter, northern part, north_, _Æ, AO, Chr_.
[‘_northdeal_’]

norðduru f. _north door_, #Bl# 203.

norðēast sbm. and adv. ‘_north-east_,’ _BC, Chr_.

norðēastende m. _north-east end_, AO 14^14.

norðēasthyrne f. _north-east corner_, LV 71.

norðēastlang _extending north-eastwards_, AO.

norðemest = norðmest

norðende m. _northern quarter_.

norðerne ‘_northern_,’ _Northumbrian, Scandinavian_, _Æ, Chr, Met_.

norðerra (_BC, Chr_) comp. adj. v. norð. [‘_norther_’]

norðeweard adj. _northward, north_, AO.

norðfolc n. _northern folk_: _people of Norfolk_.

norðgemǣre n. _northern limit_, AO.

norðhealf f. _north side, north_, _AO, Bl_. [‘_northhalf_’]

norðhere m. _army from the north_, #Chr# 910#a#.

Norðhymbre = (1) Norðanhymbre; (2) Norðhymbrisc

Norðhymbrisc _Northumbrian_, Æ.

norðland n. _northern land or shore_, _AO, Chr_. [‘_northland_’]

norðlanu f. _north lane_, Ct.

norðlēode mp. _northern folk, Angles_, LL.

norðlic _northern_, WW 361^1.

norðmann m. _dweller in the north, Scandinavian_, _Æ, AO, Chr_.
[‘_Northman_’]

norðmest (_AO, Met_) superl. of norð adj. and adv. [‘_northmost_’]

norðor (_AO_) v. norð. [‘_norther_’]

norðportic m. _north porch_, BH 106^2.

norðra v. norð.

norðrodor m. _northern sky_, #Gu# 1253.

norðryhte adv. _direct northwards, due north_, AO 17^9,12.

norðsǣ f. _northern sea_, ‘_North Sea_,’ _Æ, Chr_.

norðscēata m. _northern point, promontory_, AO 28^3.

norððēod f. _northern people_, BH 50^12.

norððunor m. _thunder from the north_, ES 39·351.

Norð-wēalas, -wālas mp. _North Welsh (i.e. not Cornish)_: _Wales_.

Norðwēalcynn n. _inhabitants of (North) Wales_, #Chr#.

norðweard adj. and adv. _north, ‘northward,’_ _Chr_; AO.

norðweardes adv. ‘_northwards_,’ _Chr_.

norðweg m. _a way leading northwards_, #Ex# 68: _Norway_.

norðwest adv. ‘_north-west_,’ _AO, BC_.

norðwestende m. _north-west end_, AO.

norðwestgemǣre m. _north-west limit, boundary_, AO 8^31.

norðwind m. _north wind_, WW 378^8.

nōse † f. _ness, promontory_.

nosgrisele = nosugrisle

nosle (_WW_ 153) = nostle

nostle f. _fillet, band_, _CP, WW_. [‘_nostel_’]

nos-ðīrl, -ðȳr(e)l, -terl (_WW_) n. ‘_nostril_,’ _Æ, Lcd_.

nosu f. gds. nosa, nose ‘_nose_,’ _Æ, Chr, CP_.

nosugrisle f. _nose-gristle_.

nōt m. _mark, note_, A 8·333. [_L._ nota]

nōtere m. _one who makes notes, scribe, writer_, OEG 2846. [_L._
notarius]

nōteðǣshwōn = nāteshwōn

notgeorn _industrious_, W 72^9. [nēotan]

±notian _to enjoy_: _use, employ_, _Bo, RB, WW_; Æ, CP: _discharge an
office_: (+) ‘_note_,’ MtL.

notu f. _enjoyment, use, advantage, utility_, _AO, RB_: _employment,
office, discharge of a duty_, _RB_; CP. [‘_note_’; nēotan]

notwrītere m. _one who makes notes, scribe_, WW 451^35.

nōð † f. _daring, boldness_: _booty, plunder_ (GK), #Whale# 28?

nōðer (_CP_) = nāhwæðer. [‘_nother_’]

nōwend m. _shipmaster, sailor_, NC 312.

nōwēr = nāhwǣr

nō-wiht (_CP, VPs_), -wuht, -wyht = nāht. [‘_nought_’]

nōwðer (_BC_) = nāhwæðer. [‘_nouther_’]

nū I. adv. _‘now,’ at present, at this time_, _A, AO, Bl, VPs_; CP:
_very recently_, _A, Bo_: _introducing commands, requests (Bl, Cr, Ps)
and arguments (Æ, Bo, CP)_. nū gēn _still_. nū gīet _as yet, still_. nū
ðā _now, already_, _Æ_ (‘_nowthe_’). II. conj. _now that, inasmuch as,
because, since, when_, _Bl, Bo, VPs_; AO, CP. III. interj. _lo! behold!
come!_ Æ. nū lā _now_.

+nugan* swv. impers. pres. 3 sg. +neah _to suffice, not to lack_.

numen I. pp. of niman. II. ‘_vulsio_,’ MkL p. 2^17 (v. A 16·74).

numol (æ^1, e^2, u^2) _‘capax,’ holding much, quick at learning_, _ÆGr,
WW_: _‘mordax,’ quick at seizing_, NC 313. [‘_nimble_’]

nūna adv. _now_, WW 254^24.

nunfǣmne f. _nun_, GD 50, 340.

nunhīred m. _nunnery_, TC 232^6.

nunlīf n. _life of a nun_, GD 199^16.

nunmynster, nunnanmynster n. _convent, nunnery_.

nunne f. ‘_nun_,’ _Æ, BH_: _pagan priestess, vestal_, _AO_.

nunscrūd n. _nun’s dress_, TC 538^12.

nusēoða = newesēoða

nūðā v. nū.

nybðe (VHy) = nymðe

+nycled (#Gl#) = +cnycled

nȳd I. = nīed. II. = nēod

nȳd- = nēad-, nīed-

nȳdbebod n. _command_, #Creat# 72.

nȳdbe-hōf, -hōflic _needful, necessary_.

nȳdboda m. _messenger of evil_? #Ex# 474.

nȳdbrice (ē) m. _requirement, need_, ÆH 2·144^31.

nȳdbysgu f. _toil, trouble_, #Rim# 44.

nȳdbysig _distressed_, #Jul# 423.

nȳdcleofa † m. _prison_.

nȳdcosting f. _affliction_, #Gu# 1126.

nȳddǣda m. _one who acts under compulsion_, LL 36[26].

+nȳdenlic _compulsory_, BH 62^23#b#.

nȳdfara m. _fugitive, exile_, #Ex# 208.

nȳdgedāl † n. _forced dissolution, death_.

nȳdgenga m. _wretched wanderer_, #Da# 633.

nȳdgestealla m. _comrade in need_, B 882.

nȳdgewald m. _tyranny_, #Cr# 1451.

nȳdgild n. _exaction, tribute_, W 162^11.

nȳdgrāp f. (#Rim# 73), nȳdgripe m. (B 976) _coercive grip_.

nȳdhǣmestre (ē) f. _mistress, concubine_, OEG 4451.

nȳdhelp mf. _help in trouble_, LL (278^2).

±nȳd-mǣg m., -māge f. _blood-relation, cousin_, LL.

nȳdmægen (ē^1) n. _force_, DR 117^13.

nȳdnǣman _to force, ravish_, LL.

nȳdnes f. _necessity_, LL (158^10).

nȳdnima (ē) m. _one who takes by force_, NG.

nȳdniman^3 (ēa) _to take by force, abduct_, LL 360[73,2].

nȳdnimu (ē) f. _rapine, forcible seizure_.

nȳdnimung f. _rapine, abduction_.

nȳdriht n. _imperative duty, office_: _due, tribute_.

nȳdðēowetling m. _bondslave_, TC 628^13.

nȳdðēowigan _to reduce to servitude, exact service from
(an ecclesiastical establishment)_, LL 381[21].

nȳdwracu † f. _violence, distress_.

nȳdwrǣclīce _violently_, ÆL 23b^404.

nȳdwyrhta m. _involuntary agent_, LL.

+nyhe = +neahhe

nȳhst == nīehst

nyht == niht

+nyht fn. _abundance, fulness, sufficiency_, CP. [+nugan]

+nyhtful _abundant, plentiful_, WW 40^34.

+nyhtlīce _abundantly_, WW 3^2.

±nyhtsum _abundant_: (+) _satisfied, contented_, adv. -līce, #VPs#.

+nyhtsumian _to suffice, abound_, Æ.

+nyhtsumnes f. _abundance, plenty_, #VPs#.

+nyhð (W 196^21) = +nyht?

nyllan* anv. pret. nolde _to be unwilling_, _Æ, B, CP, VPs_; AO:
_refuse, prevent_, _PPs_ 5^3. [‘_nill_’; ne, willan]

nyman = niman

-nyme v. fore-n.

nymne = nemne, nefne

nymðe conj. _unless, except_.

+nyp = +nip

nypel m. _trunk (of an elephant)_, Æ (4^286).

nȳr = nēar = nēah adv.

nyrgend = nergend

nyrðra = norðerra

±nyrwan, nyrwian _to narrow, curtail, restrict_: _repress, oppress,
constrain_: _blame, threaten_. [v. ‘_narrow_’]

nyrwett = nirewett

nys = nis = ne is  [[form of “wesan”]]

nysse, nyste (_Bo, Bl, VPs_) = ne wisse, ne wiste v. nytan. [‘_nist_’]

nystlan = nistlan

nyt = (1) nytt; (2) nett

+nȳt pres. 3 sg. of +nīedan.

  [[main entry is nīedan without +]]

nytan (e, i) anv. pres. 1, 3 sg. nāt, 2 nāst, pl. nyton, pret. nyste,
nysse _not to know, to be ignorant_, Æ, AO, CP. [ne, witan]

nyten _ignorant_, Æ. [ne, witan]

nȳten (_Lcd_) == nīeten

nytende adv. _ignorantly_, Æ.

nytendnes = nytennes

nytenlic _ignorant_, Æ.

nytennes (e, i) f. _ignorance, laziness, ignominy_, Æ.

nytlic _useful, profitable_. [_Ger._ nützlich]

nytlicnes f. _utility_, #Lcd# 1·314^8.

nytnes f. _use, benefit, convenience_.

nytt I. f. _use, utility, advantage_, AO, CP: _duty, office,
employment_, B: _supervision, care_, GD 180^28. II. adj. _useful,
beneficial, helpful, profitable_, AO, CP. [nēotan]

nytte = nette

±nyttian _to enjoy, use_, _Lcd_: _eat_. [‘_nutte_’]

nyttnes = nytnes

nyttol _useful_, #Lcd# 32b.

nyttung (i) f. _profit, advantage_, WW 116^37.

nytu (_MtR_ 7^16) = hnutu

nytun = nyton = ne witon  [[form of “witan”]]

nytweorð- = nytwierð-

nyt-wierðe (CP), -wirðe, -wyrðe (Æ) _useful, profitable_.

nytwierðlic _useful, profitable_. adv. -līce, CP.

nytwurð-, nytwyrð- = nytwierð-

nytwyrðnes (eo) f. _utility_, WW.

nyðan = neoðan

nyðe-, nyðer- = niðer-, niðr-

nȳw- = nīw-

nywel, nywol == neowol

nȳxt = nīehst




=O=


o = on

ō (N) = ā

ob = of

ob- (K) = of-

obet (_Cp, Ep_) = ofet

obst (Cp 217#e#) = ofost

oc = ac

ōc pret. 3 sg. of acan.

ōcon pret. pl. of acan.

ōcusta m. _armpit_, #Gl#.

ōden (ŏ?) f. _threshing-floor_.

ōdencolc _hollow serving as a threshing-floor_, EC 121^2.

+ōdon = +ēodon  [[form of “±gān”]]

oe- = e-, ē-

oeg (N) = woeg = weg

ōeghwēr = ǣghwǣr

ōeghwelc (Cp) = ǣghwilc

oeht- (N) = ēht-

oembeht (Cp) = ambiht

oemseten (= ymb-) f. _shoot, slip_? (Swt), _row (of vines)_? (BT), Cp
534#a#.

oexen = exen v. oxa.

of I. prep. w. d. _‘of,’ from, out of_, _Æ, AO, Bl, G_, _etc._: _among,
concerning, about_, _AO, BH_: _by_, _Chr_, _etc._: _derived from, made
of, belonging to_, _Æ, AO, CP_, _etc._ II. adv. _off, away, absent_,
_Bl, LL, Mt_.

ofācēapian _to buy off_, LL 122[74].

ofāceorfan^3 _to cut or prune off_, AO, CP.

ofācsian _to find out by asking, be informed, hear of, learn_, Æ.

ofādōn anv. _to pull out, tear out_, LL 86[70,74]: _leave out, except_,
LL 182[10].

ofādrīfan^1 _to hurt, chase, drive_.

ofādrincan^3 _to drain_, Æ: _quench_, AO.

ofādrygan _to dry off, wipe off_, CP 71^11.

ofæt = ofet

ofāhēawan^7 _to cut off_, ÆL 29^293.

ofāsceacan^6 _to shake off_, CM 993: _excuse_.

ofāsciran (e, y) _to cut off_, LL 68[35,5].

ofāsēoðan^2 _to purge, purify_, BH 288^9.

ofāslēan^6 _to smite off_, #Chr#.

ofātēon^2 _to pull out, withdraw_, CP.

ofāxian (Æ) = ofācsian

ofbēatan^7 _to beat to pieces, beat to death, kill_, AO.

ofblindian _to blind_, JnLR 12^40.

ofcalan^6 _to chill, make or grow cold_, Æ, #Rim# 24?

ofclipian _to obtain by calling, call for_, Æ.

ofcuman^4 _to spring from, be derived from_, Æ.

ofcyrf m. _a section, cutting_, Æ: _amputation_, Æ.

ofdæl _inclined (downwards)_, #Bo# 53^14.

of-dæle, -dele n. _decline, declivity, descent, abyss_, CP.

of-dōn anv. pret. -dyde _to put out, put off, take off (clothes)_.

ofdrǣdan^7 (but wk. pp. ofdrǣdd) _to fear, be afraid, terrified_, Æ, CP.

ofdrīfan = ofādrīfan

ofdūne adv. _down_, AO, CP.

ofdūneheald adv. _directed downwards_.

ofdūnesettan _to set down_, VHy.

ofdūnestīgan^1 _to descend_, #VPs#.

ofdūne-weard, -weardes adv. _downwards_, GD.

ofdūnrihte _downwards_, MFH 170.

ofearmian _to be pitiful_, #ERSPs# 36^22.

ofearmung f. _compassion_, #BlPs# 102^4.

ofēhtan _to persecute_, #RPs# 43^17.

ofelēte = oflǣte

ofen m., gs. ofnes _furnace_, _MtLR_: ‘_oven_,’ _Æ_.

ofenan = ufenan

ofenbacen _baked in an oven_, Æ.

ofen-raca m., -racu f. _oven-rake_, WW.

ofer I. prep. [w. d. (rest) and a. (motion)] _‘over,’ beyond, above,
upon, in, across, past_, _Æ, AO, CP_, _etc._ ofer bæc _backwards, back_:
_throughout_, _BH_: _against, in contravention of, contrary to, beyond_,
AO, BH, #Bl, Chr#: (time) _after, through, during, at the end of_, _AO,
Chr, Lcd_: _more than_: _in addition to, besides, beyond_, _Bo, LL, Mk_.
II. adv. _above, on high_, _PPs_: _to or on the other side_, _AO_: _from
side to side, across_, _AO_: _beyond, above_ (quantity), _A, BH_.

ōfer (o^2) m. (gs. ōfres) _border, margin, edge_: _brink, river-bank,
sea-shore_, _Æ, B, Lcd_; AO. [‘_over_’; v. Mdf]

oferǣt m. _gluttony, feasting, excess_, _CP_; Æ: _feast_. [‘_overeat_’]

oferǣte _gluttonous_, RB 17^15.

oferāhebban = oferhebban

oferbæcgetēung f. _tetanus_, WW 112^20.

oferbebēodan^2 _to rule_, WW 178^37.

oferbecuman^4 _to come in addition, supervene_, CM 134^1060.

oferbecumendlic _supervening_.

ofer-bēon anv. pres. 3 pl. -sind _to be over, command_, CM 112; WW
178^37.

oferbīdan^1 _to outlast, outlive_, TC. [‘_overbide_’]

oferbiternes (y^3) f. _excessive bitterness_, _SPs_.
[‘_overbitterness_’]

oferblica m. _surface_, OET 181^44.

oferblīðe _too light-hearted_, CP.

oferbrǣdan _to spread over, suffuse, be spread over, overshadow, cover
over_, _CP_; Æ. [‘_overbrede_’]

oferbrǣdels m. _outside, surface, covering_: _coverlet, veil, garment_,
Æ, CP: _cerecloth_, MF 153.

oferbrāw m. _eye-brow_, #Lcd# 3·188^5. [brǣw]

oferbrecan^4 _to transgress, violate_, AO.

oferbrēdan = oferbregdan

oferbrēdels (#KGl#) = oferbrǣdels

oferbregdan^3 _to draw over, cover, overspread_: _be covered over, show
a film over_.

oferbrū f. _eye-brow_, #Gl#.

oferbrycgian _to span as by a bridge_, _Æ_. [‘_overbridge_’]

ofercæfed _overlaid with ornament_, GPH 394.

oferceald _excessively cold_, _Run_ 11. [‘_overcold_’]

ofercerr m. _passing over_, MtL 1^11. [cierr]

ofercīdan _to chide sharply_.

ofercīdung f. _chiding, reproof_, #EPs# 149^7.

oferclif n. _steep place, overhanging cliff_, WW 480^2.

oferclimban^3 _to climb over_, _AO_ 134^13. [‘_overclimb_’]

ofercræft m. _fraud_, LL (166^20).

ofercuman^4 _to overcome, subdue, compel, conquer_, _AO, B, Lcd, WW_;
CP: _obtain, attain, reach, overtake_, _BH, Cp, Jud, WW_. [‘_overcome_’]

ofercyme m. _arrival_, BH 436^28.

ofercȳðan _to outdo by preponderance of oaths_, v. LL 2·689.

oferdōn anv. _to ‘overdo,’ do to excess_, _Æ_. oferdōne ðing _excesses_,
_Æ_.

oferdrenc (Æ) = oferdrync

oferdrencan _to make drunk, intoxicate_, AO, CP.

oferdrīfan^1 _to overcome, defeat, dispense_, _Æ, DR_: _confute_, Æ:
_cover (by drifting sand)_, AO: _outvote_, _LL_. [‘_overdrive_’]

oferdrinc = oferdrync

oferdrincan^3 _to drink too much, get drunk_, _CP, LL_. [‘_overdrink_’]

oferdrincere m. _drunkard_, HL 12^95,124.

oferdruncen I. n. _drunkenness_, LL. II. ptc. _drunk_.

oferdruncennes f. _drunkenness, intemperance_, Æ, CP.

oferdrync m. _over-drinking, drunkenness_, _CP_: _revelry, feasting_.
[v. ‘_overdrink_’]

oferdyre n. _lintel_, WW 280^16.

ofere _over, across_, v. LV 8.

oferēaca m. _surplus, overplus, remainder, addition_, _increase_, Æ.

ofereald (y) _very old_, RB 61^12.

oferealdormann m. _chief officer_, BH 264^1 (v.l.).

oferēca = oferēaca

ofereldu (HL 11^60#n#) = oferyldu

oferēt = oferǣt

ofer-etol (CP), -eotol, -ettol _gluttonous_.

oferetolnes f. _gluttony_, CP.

oferfær n. _passing over_, NG.

oferfæreld n. _passage, journey over or across_, Æ, AO.

oferfǣt _too fat_, _WW_. [‘_overfat_’]

oferfæðman _to envelop, overshadow_.

oferfaran^6 (intr.) _to pass, cross, go over_, _Ps_: (tr.) _traverse, go
through, penetrate_, _Gen, W_; Æ, AO: _come across, meet with,
overtake_: _pass through, withstand, overcome_. [‘_overfare_’]

oferfeallan^7 _to attack_, #Bl# 203.

oferfeng I. m. _fibula, buckle, clasp_, #Gl#. II. pret. 3 sg. of
oferfōn.

oferfeohtan^3 _to conquer_, CP.

oferfēran _to traverse, cross, pass over or through_, Æ, AO: _come upon,
meet with_.

oferferian _to carry over, transport_, OEG 3680.

oferfērnes f. _chance of crossing, fordable place_, BH 58^1.

oferfēðre _overloaded_, v. ES 43·312.

oferfil = oferfyll

oferflēdan _to overflow, flood_, #Lcd#.

oferflēde _in flood_, #Lcd#.

oferflēon^2 _to fly over_, Æ: _flee from, yield to_, B 2525.

oferflītan^1 _to overcome, beat, confute_, AO.

oferflōwan^7 _to flow over, run over, ‘overflow,’_ _AO, Lk_.

ofer-flōwednes, -flōwen(d)nes f. _excess, superfluity_.

ofer-flōwend (_RB_), -flōwendlic (#Bk# 18) _superfluous_.
[‘_overflowing_’] adv. -līce.

oferflōwnes f. _superfluity_, CP.

oferfōn^7 _to seize, take prisoner_, AO.

oferfrēcednes f. _pressure, oppression_, #V^2Ps# 31^7.

oferfroren _frozen over_, AO.

oferfull _too full_, _LPs_. [‘_overfull_’]

oferfundennes f. _trial, experiment_, OEG 543.

oferfylgan _to pursue, attack_, CP.

ofer-fyll, -fyllu f. _surfeit, gluttony, excess_, _Bo, Lcd_; Æ, CP.
[‘_overfyll_’]

oferfyllan _to cram_, RB, WW.

oferfylnes f. _surfeit, excess_, GD 339^3.

oferfyrr f. _excessive distance_, AO 24^21. [feorr]

ofergǣgan _to transgress_, Æ.

ofergǣgednes f. _transgression_, Æ.

ofergǣgend m. _transgressor_, ÆL 30^411.

ofer-gān anv., -gangan^7 _to pass over, beyond, across, traverse,
cross_, _Æ, Lcd, VPs_; AO, CP: _transgress_, _MtL_: _overrun, overcome,
overspread, conquer_, _Chr, Ex, Lcd, Rd_; Æ: _come upon, overtake,
seize, attach_, _Æ, An_: _pass off, pass away, end_, _AO, CP_.
[‘_overgo_,’ ‘_overgang_’]

ofergapian _to be forgetful of, neglect_, RB 112^2.

ofergēare _old_, #Lcd# 19a.

ofergeatu f. _oblivion_, #PPs# 128^6.

ofergeatul = ofergitol

ofergedrync n. _excess in drinking_, #Bl# 99^21.

ofergedyre = oferdyre

ofergemet n. _excess_, AS, CP.

ofergēmnes f. _watching for_, NG. [gīeman]

ofergenga m. _traveller_, #Lcd#.

ofergenihtsumian _to superabound_, #Sc# 131^15.

ofergeong (= gang) m. _going across_.

ofergeotan = ofergietan

ofergēotan^2 _to pour upon, suffuse, flood, overwhelm_, Æ.

ofergeotende _forgetful_, BH 114^22. [ofergietan]

ofer-geotol, -geottol == ofergitol

ofergesettan _to set over_, CP, #VPs#.

ofergestondan^6 _to stand over_.

ofergetilian _to overcome_, ÆL 23b^185.

ofergetimbran _to erect_, #Bl# 205.

ofergetol- = ofergitol-

ofergeweorc n. _superstructure_: _sepulchre_, Æ.

ofergewrit n. _superscription, inscription_.

ofergietan^5 _to forget, disregard, neglect_, CP.

ofergīfre _gluttonous_, CP.

ofergildan = ofergyldan

ofergīman _to neglect, disregard_.

ofergitan = ofergietan

ofer-gitol, -gittol (ea, eo, y) _forgetful_.

ofergitolian (e, eo) _to forget_, #JVPs#.

ofergitolnes (e, eo, y) f. _forgetfulness_.

oferglænged _over-adorned_, LL (386^10). [glengan]

oferglīdan^1 _to glide over, traverse, pass over, overshadow_, Æ.

ofergrǣdig _too covetous_, _W_. [‘_overgreedy_’]

ofergrōwan^7 _to overgrow_, CP 336^8.

ofergumian _to neglect, disregard_, RB 113^2.

ofergyld _gilt_, Æ.

ofergyldan (i) _to encase, overlay or adorn with gold_, Æ, CP.

ofergylden _overlaid with gold_, LL 460[10].

ofergȳman = ofergīman

ofergyrd ptc. _girt_, GPH 394.

ofergytan = ofergietan

ofergytnes f. _oblivion, forgetfulness_.

oferhacele f. _hood_, LL (140^22).

oferhangen _covered_, GD 202^19.

oferhēafod adv. _especially, in particular_, Æ. [_Ger._ überhaupt]

oferhēah _very tall, lofty_, _Run_ 26. [‘_overhigh_’]

oferhealdan^7 _to put off, neglect_.

oferhealfhēafod n. _crown of the head_, WW 156^11.

oferheargian = oferhergan  [[headword spelled “oferhergean”]]

oferhebban^6 _to pass over, omit, neglect_, _AO, LL_; CP.
[‘_overheave_’]

oferhelian _to cover over, conceal_, _Sc_; CP. [‘_overhele_’]

oferhelmian _to overshadow_, B 1364.

oferhelung f. _covering, veiling, concealing_, #Sc# 223^5.

oferheortnes f. _vehemence of feeling_, AO 166^20.

oferhergean _to overrun, ravage_, AO.

oferhīdig = oferhygdig

oferhīeran (ēo, ȳ) _to ‘overhear,’ hear_, _AO_: _disobey, disregard,
neglect_, _AO_.

oferhīernes (ē, ī, ȳ) f. _neglect, disobedience_: _fine for
transgression of law or legal orders (= ‘superauditio’)_, LL.

oferhigd = oferhygd

oferhige? m. _pride_, #PPs# 87^7. [hyge]

oferhigian _to delude, turn the head of_, B 2766.

oferhīran (AO) = oferhīeran

oferhlæstan _to overload_, AO.

oferhlēapan^7 _to jump over, surmount, overcome_, _BH_: _pass over_,
_Lcd_. [‘_overleap_’]

oferhlēapend m. _over-leaper_, WW 190^2.

oferhlēoðrian _to surpass in loudness_.

oferhlēoður _failing to hear_, #PPs# 93^9.

oferhlīfan^1 (OEG), oferhlīfian (Æ, CP) _to tower over, overtop, excel,
exceed, surpass_.

oferhlīfung f. _loftiness, sublimity_, #Gl#.

ofer-hlūd, -hlȳde _clamorous, noisy_, _WW_. [‘_overloud_’] adv. -hlūde.

oferhlȳp m. _a jump (over something)_, A 8·308; 316.

oferhlyttrian _to clarify, strain_, #ÆGr# 222^8.

oferhoga m. _despiser, proud man_.

oferhogian _to despise (Bl, Bo)_. [‘_overhow_’]

oferhogiend m. _despiser_, RB 48^6.

oferhogodnes f. _pride, disdain_, GD 144^3.

oferholt n. _phalanx of shields_, #Ex# 157.

oferhrǣgan (w. d.) _to tower above_? #Sol# 35.

oferhrēfan _to roof over, cover_.

oferhrēred _overthrown_, WW.

oferhrops _greediness_, WW 102^19.

oferhrȳfan = oferhrēfan

oferhrȳred = oferhrēred

oferhycgean _to despise_, AO, CP.

oferhȳd = oferhygd

oferhȳd- = oferhygd-

oferhygd (i) I. fn. _pride, conceit, arrogance_, CP. II. adj. _haughty,
proud_.

oferhygdgian _to be proud_, #CVPs# 9^23.

oferhygdig I. n. _pride_. II. adj. _haughty, proud_.

ofer-hygdiglīce, -hīdlīce, _arrogantly_, NC 313.

oferhygdu f. = oferhygd I.

oferhylmend m. _dissembler_, #PPs# 118^119.

oferhȳran = oferhīeran

oferhȳre _heedless, neglectful_, LL (244^22).

oferhyrned _having horns above_, #Run# 2.

oferhȳrnes f. _heedlessness, neglect, disobedience_, LL.

+oferian _to elevate_, #HGl# 428.

oferīdyllīce _vainly, emptily_, #CPs# 30^7.

ofering f. _superabundance_, #Bo#.

oferlād f. _‘translatio,’ solemn removal of the body or relics of a
saint to a shrine_, DR 62^9.

oferlǣdan _to oppress_, _Bl_. [‘_overlead_’]

oferlǣfan _to be left over, remain_, _LkLR_. [‘_overleave_’]

oferlagu f. _cloak_, #Gl#.

oferlecgan _to place over_, CM 899: _overburden, surfeit_, HL 11^99;
12^73.

oferlēof _very dear_, #Run# 23.

oferlēoran _to pass over, or by_: _transgress, prevaricate_.

oferlēornes f. _transgression_, #CPs# 100^3.

oferlibban _to survive_, _ÆGr, TC_. [‘_overlive_’]

oferlīce _excessively_, _W_. [v. ‘_overly_’]

oferlifa (y^3) m. _excess_, NC 348.

oferlīfian = oferhlīfian  [[under “oferhlīfan”]]

oferlīhtan _to light upon_, ÆL 23b^558: _excel in brightness_.

oferlīðan^1 _to pass over_.

oferlufu f. _too great love_, _W_. [‘_overlove_’]

oferlyfa = oferlifa

oferlyftlic _above the air_, NC 314.

ofermæcga † m. _very illustrious being_.

ofermægen † n. _overpowering might_.

ofermæstan _to over-fatten_.

ofermǣte _excessive, immoderate_, _AO, CP_. [‘_overmete_’]

ofermǣtlic _vast_, AO 52^10.

ofermǣto = ofermētto

ofermagan swv. _to have greater power, prevail_, #Sc# 97^19.

ofermāðum m. _costly treasure_, B 2993.

ofermearcung f. _superscription_, MkL p 5^1.

ofermēde I. n. _pride_, CP. II. adj. _proud, arrogant_. [mōd]

ofermēdla m. _haughtiness, pride_.

ofermēdu (CP) = ofermētto

ofermete m. _gorging, gluttony_, CP.

ofermētto f. (often in pl.) _pride_, Æ, AO, CP.

ofermicel _over-much, excessive_, _AO, RB_. [‘_overmickle_’]

ofermicelnes f. _excess_, #Sc# 13.

ofermōd (1) n. _pride, insolence_, _Gen, Ma_. [‘_overmod_’] (2) adj.
_proud, overbearing, insolent_, _Bl_; Æ, CP.

ofer-mōdgian (CP), -mōdig(i)an _to be proud, arrogant_.

ofermōdgung f. _pride_, CP.

ofermōdig _proud, arrogant_, _Lcd_; AO. [v. ‘_overmod_’]

ofermōdignes f. _pride, haughtiness, arrogance_, _Mk_. [v. ‘_overmod_’]

ofermōdlic _proud, haughty, insolent_, CP. adv. -līce.

ofermōdnes = ofermōdignes

ofernēod f. _extreme need_, #Bk#, LL.

oferniman^4 (y) _to take away, carry off, seize, ravish_.

ofernōn fn. _afternoon (after 3.0 p.m.)_, WW 175^47.

oferorn = oferarn pret. 3 sg. of oferyrnan.

oferprūt _‘over-proud,’ presumptuous, arrogant, haughty_, _Sc_.

oferprȳda m. _excessive pride_.

oferrǣdan _to read over_, _Æ_: _consider, infer_. [‘_overread_’]

oferranc _too luxurious_, _W_ 46^1. [‘_overrank_’]

oferreccan _to confute, convince, convict_, CP.

oferrencu f. _extravagance_, W 46^2.

oferrīcsian _to rule over_, CP 119^19.

oferrīdan^1 _to ride across_, _BH_. [‘_override_’]

oferrōwan^7 _to row over_, Æ.

ofersǣlic _on the other side of the sea_, BH 246^3.

ofersǣlig _excessively happy_, DD 246.

ofersǣlð f. _excessive pleasure_, #Met# 5^27.

ofersǣwisc _from across the sea, foreign_.

ofersāwan^7 _to sow over_, Mt 13^25.

oferscēadan^7 _to scatter over, sprinkle over_, #Lcd# 67b.

ofer-sceadian (CP), -sceadewian _to overshadow_.

ofersceatt m. _usury, interest_, MtR 25^27.

oferscēawian _to superintend_, LL.

oferscēawigend m. _overseer, bishop_, LL.

oferscīnan^1 _to illuminate_.

oferscūan _to overshadow_.

ofersēam m. _bag_, LkL 12^33.

ofersēcan _to overtax_, B 2686.

ofersegl m. _top-sail_, WW 7^4.

oferseglian _to sail across_, _Mt_. [‘_oversail_’]

ofersēgon = ofersāwon pret. pl. of ofersēon.

ofersendan _to transmit_, #ÆGr# 172^13.

ofersēocnes f. _great illness_, LL.

oferseolfrian (y) _to cover over with silver_, AO.

ofersēon^5 _to see over, overlook, survey, observe, see_, _Bo_:
_despise, neglect_, _W_. [‘_oversee_’]

ofersettan _to set over_, #VPs#: _overcome_, GD 347^30.

ofersittan^5 _occupy, possess_, _Bo, VPs_: _forbear, desist, refrain
from_, _Æ, B_. [‘_oversit_’]

oferslæge = oferslege

oferslǣp m. _too much sleep_, #Lcd# 1·342^13.

oferslēan^6 _to subdue, overcome_, RB 32^15.

oferslege n. _lintel_, Æ.

oferslop n. _loose upper garment, surplice, stole_, _Lcd, LkL_.
[‘_overslop_’]

oferslype m. _over-garment, surplice_, Æ.

ofersmēaung f. _too exhaustive consideration_, CP 97^17.

ofersprǣc f. _loquacity_, CP.

ofersprǣce _talkative, tattling, tale-bearing_, Æ, CP.

ofersprǣdan _to overlay, cover_, RB.

oferspreca m. _one who talks too much_, OEG 28^9.

ofersprecan^5 _to say too much, be abusive_.

ofersprēce = ofersprǣce

ofersprecol _talking too much, tattling, indiscreet_, CP.

ofersprecolnes f. _talkativeness_, CP 308^16.

oferstǣlan _to confute, convict, convince_, Æ, CP.

oferstæppan^6 _to over-step, cross_: _exceed_.

oferstandan^6 _to come upon_, BH 308^25.

ofersteall m. _opposition_, ÆH 1·534^20.

oferstealla m. _survivor_, MH 210^28.

oferstellan _to jump over_, BH 400^22.

ofersteppan = oferstæppan

oferstīgan^1 _to climb over, mount, scale, surmount, overcome_, _AO_: Æ,
CP: _surpass, excel, exceed_, _BH_; Æ, CP. [‘_oversty_’]

oferstige m. _astonishment_, ÆL 23^555.

oferstīgendlic _superlative_, #ÆGr# 15^18.

oferstigennes _‘extasis,’ passing over_, OEG 405.

oferswimman^3 _to swim over or across_, _B_ 2367. [‘_overswim_’]

oferswingan^3 ‘_transverberare_’! GD 344^33.

oferswīðan (ȳ) wv. and sv^1 _to overpower, overcome, conquer, vanquish_,
Æ, AO, CP: _excel, surpass_.

oferswīðe adv. _over-much, excessive_.

oferswīðestre f. ‘_victrix_,’ WW 224^39.

oferswīðnes f. _pressure, distress_, NG.

oferswīðrian _to prevail, conquer_.

oferswīðung f. _pressure, distress_, NG.

oferswōgan^7 _to cover, choke_, #Bl# 203^9.

oferswȳðan = oferswīðan

ofersylfrian (AO) = oferseolfrian

ofersȳman _to overload, oppress_. [sēam]

ofertæl n. _odd number_, #Lcd# 1·288.

ofertǣle _superstitious_, #Sc# 218^10.

oferteldan^3 _to cover over_, #Ex# 81.

ofertēon^2 _to draw over, cover_, Æ: _finish_.

ofertogennes f. _the condition of being covered_.

ofertrahtnian _to treat of_, ÆH 1·202^28.

ofertredan _to tread down_, _GPH_. [‘_overtread_’]

ofertrūwa m. _over-confidence_, _LL_ 180, 8, 7. [‘_overtrow_’]

ofertrūwian _to trust too much_, CP.

oferðearf f. _great need, extreme distress_.

oferðearfa m. _one in great need_, #Cr# 153.

oferðeccan _to cover over, hide_, Æ.

oferðēon^1,3 _to excel, surpass_, Æ, CP.

oferðoht _thought over, considered_, GD 316^20.

oferðrēawian (ā^3) ‘_increpare_,’ #EPs# 67^31.

oferðryccednes (i) f. _pressure, oppression_, #CPs# 31^7.

oferðrymm m. _excessive power_, DD 52.

oferwacian _to watch over_, _Æ_. [‘_overwake_’]

oferwadan^6 _to wade across_, _AO_ 72^33. [‘_overwade_’]

oferwealdan^7 _to get the better of_, LL 454[7].

oferwealdend m. _over-lord, ruler_, #El# 1236.

oferweaxan^6 _to overgrow, overspread_, _Æ, Bl_. [‘_overwax_’]

oferweder n. _storm, tempest_, #Chr# 794#e#.

oferwelig _very rich_, NC 314.

ofer-wennan, -wenian _to be proud, become insolent or presumptuous_.

oferweorc n. _sarcophagus, tomb_, _Æ, OEG_. [‘_overwork_’]

oferweorpan^3 _to throw over, overthrow_, _CP, Lcd_: _throw down,
assault_, LL 56[11,1]: _cast something over another, sprinkle_:
_stumble_? B 1543. [‘_overwarp_’]

oferwīgan _to overcome_, #Sol# 299.

oferwillan^7 _to boil down_. [weallan]

oferwinnan^3 _to contend with, overcome, subdue_, _Æ, AO_; CP.
[‘_overwin_’]

oferwintran _to go through the winter_, _WW_. [‘_overwinter_’]

oferwist f. _gluttony, excess_, CP.

oferwistlic _supersubstantial_, MtL 6^11.

oferwlencan _to be very wealthy_, AO 44^12. [wlanc]

oferwlencu f. _excessive riches_, #Gu# 389.

oferwrecan^5 _to overwhelm_, WW 35^14.

oferwrēon^1,2 _to cover over, conceal, hide_, _VPs_: _clothe_, _Mt_.
[‘_overwry_’]

oferwrīgels n. _covering_, #Gl#.

oferwrit n. _epistle_, MtL p10^1.

oferwyllan = oferwillan

oferwyrcan _to cover over, overlay_, _Sol_; Æ, AO. [‘_overwork_’]

oferyld (W 147^17) = oferyldu

oferyldu f. _extreme old age_, MFH 170.

oferyrnan^3 _to go or run over_, _Æ, Lcd_: _‘overrun’, cover over,
overwhelm_, _Æ, BH_: _run past, cross_.

oferȳð f. _overwhelming wave_, #SPs# 54^25.

ofesc f. _border_? KC 3·393^10.

ofest = ofost

ofestan = ofstan

ofet, ofett (æ) n. _fruit, legume_, _Gen, WW_. [‘_ovet_’]

ofetrip? n. _harvest_, ZDPh 36·550.

ofeweard = ufeweard

offǣran = āfǣran

offaran^6 _to intercept, overtake, fall upon, attack_, Æ, AO. hindan o.
_to intercept from behind, cut off retreat_, AO.

offeallan^7 _to fall upon, cut off, kill, destroy, end_, _Æ, Chr_; AO:
_fall away from, be lost to_, LL 144[6]. hine offēoll _committed
suicide_, #Chr# 962#a#. [‘_offall_’]

offellan = offyllan

offēran _to overtake (an enemy)_, Æ.

offerenda m. _psalm or anthem sung during the offertory_, ÆP 168^15; ANS
84·5^29.

offerian _to carry off_, B 1583.

offestre f. _a woman of some unknown calling_? CC 10^22.

offlēogan^3 _to fly away_.

offrian _to ‘offer,’ sacrifice, bring an oblation_, _Æ, AO, VPs_; CP.
[_L._ offerre]

offringclāð m. _offertory cloth_, NC 314.

offringdagas mpl. _offering days_, OEG 40^23.

offringdisc m. _offering-dish, paten_, Ct.

offringhlāf m. _shew-bread_, Mt 12^4.

offringsang m. _hymn while an offering is made_, ÆH 1·218^9; ÆP 214^23.

offringsceat m. _offering-napkin_, BC 3·366.

offrung f. _presenting to God, oblation, sacrifice_, _Æ, Mt_: _thing
presented, ‘offering,’_ _Æ_. [offrung- v. also offring-]

offrunghūs n. _house of sacrifice_, NC 314.

offrungspic n. _sacrificial bacon_, ÆL 25^92.

offyligan _to follow up_, LkLR 1^3.

offyllan _to strike down, destroy, kill_.

of-gān anv., pret. -ēode; -gangan^7 _to demand, require, exact, extort_,
_Æ_: _attain, obtain, acquire, gain_, _Æ_: _start from, begin_.
[‘_ofgo_’]

ofgangend-e, -lic _derivative_, #ÆGr#.

ofgefen (Cp) = ofgifen pp. of ofgiefan.

ofgēotan^2 _to moisten, soak, steep_, Æ: _quench_, Æ.

ofgerād _fitting_, #Bo# 8^8.

ofgestīgnes f. _descent_, MtL p6^1.

ofgiefan^5 (i, y) _to give up, resign, leave, quit, desert_, AO.
[giefan]

ofhabban _to hold back_, Æ.

ofhagian _to be inconvenient_, W.

ofhealdan^7 _to withhold, retain_.

ofhearmian (impers.) _to cause grief_.

ofhende _(out of hand), lost, absent_, #Met# 25^34.

ofhingrian _to be hungry_, _Æ_ (3^551). [‘_ofhingered_’]

  [[headword in OED is “ofhungered”]]

ofhnītan _to gore to death_, LL 32[21].

ofhrēosan^2 _to overwhelm, cover over_, Æ: _fall down, fall
headlong_, Æ.

ofhrēowan^2 _to cause or feel pity_, _Æ_. [‘_arewe_’]

ofhwylfan _to roll up_? ARHy 2^12.

ofirnan^3 _to overtake_, _Æ, Bo_: _tire with running_, Æ. [‘_ofrun_’]

oflǣtan^7 _to let go, lay aside, leave behind_: _let flow_, #Bo# 66^29.

oflǣte (ā, ē) f. _oblation, offering_, _Ps_: _sacramental wafer_, _Æ,
Lcd_. [‘_oflete_’; _L._ oblata]

oflǣthlāf m. _sacramental wafer_, GD 343^15.

oflangian _to long_, _Æ_. [‘_oflonged_’]

oflāte (_VPs_) = oflǣte

oflecgan _to lay down_, #PPs# 68^1.

oflēogan^2 _to lie, be false_, #PPs# 17^43.

oflēte = oflǣte

oflicgan^5 _to overlay (a child)_, _LL_. [‘_oflie_’]

oflīcian (w. d.) _to displease, be displeasing to_, Æ.

oflinnan^3 _to cease, stop_, #Bl# 247^8.

oflongian = oflangian

oflystan _to fill with desire, please_, _Bo_; Æ. pp. of-lysted, -lyst
_desirous of, pleased with_. [‘_oflust_’]

ofmanian _to exact (a fine)_, LL.

ofmunan swv. _to remember, recollect_, CP.

ofmyrðrian _to murder_, #Chr# 979#e#.

ofn = ofen

ofnēadian _to obtain by force, extort_, TC 295^22.

ofnet n? _closed vessel_, #Lcd# 11b. [ofn]

ofniman^4 _to fail_, LL (170^6).

ofor = (1) eofor; (2) ufor; (3) ofer

ōfor = ōfer

ofost f. _haste, speed, zeal_, Æ. adv. -līce. on ofoste, of(e)stum
_speedily, hastily_.

ofr (#Gl#) = hofer

ofrǣcan _to get through (an ordeal) successfully_, LL 333 col 2.

ōfres gs. of ōfer.

ofrian = offrian

ofrung (AO) = offrung

ofrīdan^1 _to overtake by riding, overtake_, _Æ, Chr_. [‘_ofride_’]

ofsacan^6 _to deny a charge_, _LL_ 108#b# n. 5. [‘_ofsake_’]

ofscacan^6 _to shudder_, OEG 4160.

ofsceamian (a) _to put to shame_, _Æ, Bo_. [‘_ofshame_’]

ofscēotan^2 _to shoot down, hit, kill_, Æ, AO, CP. pp. ofscoten
_elf-struck (of cattle seized with sudden disease)_.

ofscleacnes (#APs# 43^22) = ofslegennes

ofscotian _to shoot dead_, AO.

ofsendan _to send for, summon_, _Chr_ 1048. [‘_ofsend_’]

ofsēon^5 _to see, behold_, _Æ_. [‘_ofsee_’]

ofsetenes f. _siege_, WW 458^28.

ofsetnian _to besiege_, NC 349.

ofsettan (æ) _to beset, oppress, afflict_, _Hept, Lcd_; Æ. [‘_ofset_’]

ofsettung f. _pressure_, #Sc# 143^5.

ofsittan^5 _to press down, repress, oppress_, Æ, CP: _occupy_, _Hept,
Bo_; CP: _hedge in, compass about, besiege_. [‘_ofsit_’]

ofslēan^6 _to strike off or out, cut off_: _strike down, kill_, _AO, BH,
Lcd_; Æ, CP. [‘_ofslay_’]

ofslegennes f. _slaughter_, #JRVPs# 43^22.

ofslītan^6 _to bite (of a serpent)_, Æ.

ofsmorian _to suffocate, strangle_, AO.

ofsnīðan^1 _to cut off, kill_, Æ.

ofspring m. _‘offspring,’ descendants, posterity_, _Æ, CD_.

ofspyrian _to trace out_, LL 96[17].

ofst = ofost

ofstæppan^6 _to trample upon_, Æ.

ofstan _to hasten_, CM 186.  [[from first edition; see “ofstende”
below]]

ofstandan^6 _to remain, persist, continue_, _Lcd_; Æ: _restore, make
restitution_. [‘_ofstand_’]

ofstede adv. _immediately_, #Sc# 193^12.

ofstende _hastening_, CM 186.

ofstician _to pierce, stab (to death)_, _transfix_, AO.

ofstig _swift_, GPH 392.

ofstingan^3 _to pierce, stab (to death)_, _AO, Chr_; Æ, CP.
[‘_ofsting_’]

ofstint (= ofstent) pres. 3 sg. of ofstandan.

ofstlīce = ofostlīce  [[form of “ofost”]]

ofstofen _impelled_, #PPs#.

ofstum v. ofost.

ofswelgan^3 _to swallow up_, #Bo# 46^15n.

ofswerian _to abjure, deny on oath_, LL.

ofswingan^3 _to scourge (to death)_, AO 154^8.

oft adv. comp. oftor, superl. oftost _often, frequently_, _CP, G_; Æ.
oftost symle _continually_. o. and gelome _diligently_. [‘_oft_’]

oftacan^2 _to overtake_, NC 325 (late).

oftalu f. _rejoinder, verdict against a claim_, TC 302^22.

oftēon^2 _to withhold, withdraw_, Æ, CP.

oftfēðre _requiring many journeys to carry_, v. ES 43·312.

ofthrǣd- = oftrǣd-

oftige m. _withholding_, LL.

oftorfian _to stone to death_, Æ, AO.

oftrǣde _often or always available_: _frequent_, #Bo# 136^17.

oftrǣdlic _frequent_, AO. adv. -līce, CP.

oftredan^5 _to tread down, trample on, tread to death_, _Æ, AO_.
[‘_oftread_’]

oftsīð m. _frequent occasion_, AO. on oftsīðas _frequently_, #Chr#
979#c#.

oftðwēal n. _frequent washing_, NC 314.

oftyrfan _to stone_, AO 172^28.

ofðǣnan _to moisten_, #Lcd#.

ofðe _or_, OEG 11^177 and n.

ofðecgan _to destroy_, #Gen# 2002.

ofðefian _to dry up_? ÆL 34^144.

ofðencan _to recall to mind_, CP 349^10.

ofðennan = ofðænnan  [[variant of “ofðǣnan”]]

ofðincð pres. 3 sg. of ofðyncan.

ofðinen _moist_ (pp. of *ofðīnan).

of-ðreccan (#KGl#), -ðriccan = ofðryccan

ofðringan^3 _to throng, press upon_, Æ.

ofðryccan (e, i) _to press, squeeze_, Æ: _oppress, afflict, repress_, Æ:
_occupy forcibly_.

of-ðryccednes, -ðrycnes f. _distress, trouble, oppression_, CP.

ofðryscan _to repress, subdue_, CP.

of-ðrysmian, -ðrysman _to choke, stifle_. [ðrosm]

ofðylman _to choke, suffocate_, NC 314.

ofðyncan (impers.) _to give offence, insult, vex, displease, weary,
grieve_, _Æ, AO, B, Bo, CP, LL_. [‘_ofthink_’]

ofðyrstan _to suffer from thirst, be thirsty, thirst (for)_, _Hept,
Soul_; Æ. [‘_athirst_,’ ‘_ofthirst_’]

ofðȳstrian _to obscure_, #SPs# 73^21. [ðēostrian]

ofunnan swv. _to begrudge, deny, grudge, envy_, Æ, CP.

ofweard (MFH 170) = æfweard

ofweorpan^3 _to stone (to death)_, _kill by a missile_, Æ, AO.

ofworpian _to kill (by stoning)_, LL.

ofwundrian _to be astonished_, Æ.

ōfȳrit (WW 385^39) = āfȳred pp. of āfȳran.

ōga m. _fear, terror, dread_, Æ: _terrible object_, Æ. [ege]

ōgengel m. _bar, bolt_, WW 459^10.

ō-hilde (e^2, y^2), -heald _sloping, inclined_, #Gl#.

ōhsta = ōcusta

ōht I. † f. _persecution_? _fear_? [cp. _Ger._ acht] II. = āwuht

ohtrip v. ofetrip.

ō-hwǣr = ā-hwǣr

ō-hwæðer = ā-hwæðer

ōhwanon = āhwonan

ōhylde = ōhilde

ōl pret. 3 sg. of alan.

ōlǣc- = olece-

olbend = olfend

±ōleccan (æ, i) _to soothe, caress, flatter_: _please, charm,
propitiate_, CP. [leccan]

ōleccere, ōlecere m. _flatterer_, CP (i).

ōleccung (æ) f. _soothing, flattery, persuasion, allurement, charm_, CP.

ōlectend m. _flatterer_, Cp 1519. [= ōleccend pres. ptc. of ōleccan]

ōlectung (MFH 170) = ōlehtung

ōlehtung f. _flattery_, MFH 170.

ōlfæt = ālfæt

olfend mf., olfenda m. _camel_, _Bl, Mt_; CP. [‘_olfend_’; _L._
elephantem]

olfendmyre f. _she-camel_, Æ.

ōlicc- = ōlecc-

oll n. _contumely, contempt, scorn, insult_, Æ. on oll ‘_nequicquam_,’
OEG 2000.

ollonc, ollunc, ollung (LWS; A) = andlang

ōlðwong m. _strap_, WW 379^32.

ōlyhtword n. _flattering speech_, #Bl# 99^26. [ōleccan]

ōm m. _rust_, Æ.

om- = am-

ōma? m. ome? f. _a liquid measure_, v. NC 314. [_L._ (h)ama; _Ger._ ohm]

ōman fp. _eruptions of the skin, erysipelas_, #Lcd#. [cp. healsōme]

omb- = amb-

ōmcynn n. _corrupt humour_, #Lcd# 31a.

omer (a^1, e^1) _a bird, ‘scorellus,’_ #Gl#.

ōmian _to become rusty_, #Sc# 196^5.

ōmiddan = onmiddan

ōmig _rusty, rust-eaten, rust-coloured_: _inflammatory_, #Lcd#.

ōmiht _inflammatory_, #Lcd#.

ompella = ampella

ompre = ampre I.

on I. prep. (w. d., instr., and a.) (local, etc.) _‘on,’ upon, on to_
(but ofer is more common), _up to, among_, _AO, CP, Bo, BH, G_: _in,
into, within_, _Æ, BH, Ps_: (temporal) _in, during, at, on, about_, _Æ,
AO_: _against, towards_, _AO, BH, Mt_: _according to, in accordance
with, in respect to_, _Æ, Bo, Ps_: _for, in exchange for_. II. adv.
_on_, _BH, CP_: _forward, onward_, #An#: _continuously_, _Æ_ (forð on),
on riht _rightly_. on ǣr adv. _formerly_. on ān _continuously, in
concert_: _at once, forthwith_. III. pres. 3 sg. of unnan. IV. (M) =
ond, and

on- I. often meaningless, and only rarely = prep. on. II. = an-. III.
= un-

onāblāwan^1 _to blow on_, Æ.

onādōn anv. _to put on_, ÆL 7^156.

onǣht f. _possession_, #CVPs# 2^8.

onǣlan _to set fire to, ignite, heat, inspire, incite, inflame, burn,
consume_, _Chr_ (an-), _Gen, Sol_; Æ, CP. [‘_anneal(ed)_’]

onǣlend m. ‘_incensor_,’ GPH 399.

onǣlet n. _lightning_, #LPs# 143^6.

onǣr adv. _formerly_. [on]

onæðele (w. d.) _natural to_, #Met# 13^51.

onāhebban^6 _to lift up, exalt_, CP 56^19.

onāl n. _burning_: _incense, what is burnt_.

onārīsan^1 _to rise up (against)_, #ERPs#.

onarn pret. 3 sg. of oniernan.

onāsāwan^7 _to implant, instil_, MFH 170.

onāscunung = onscunung

onāsendan _to send into, implant in, impart to_, CM 203.

onāsendednes (ǣ) f. ‘_immissio_,’ #LPs# 77^49.

onāsetednes f. _a laying on (of hands)_, NC 349.

onāsettan _to set upon, place on, impress upon_, Æ, CM.

onāswēgan _to sound forth_, #LPs# 28^3.

onāwinnan^3 _to fight against_, #LPs# 34^1; 55^2.

onbæc adv. _backwards, back, behind_.

onbæcling (e) adv. _backward, behind_. o. gewend _having one’s back
turned_, Æ.

onbærnan _to kindle, ignite, heat, excite, inspire, inflame, burn_,
AO, CP.

on-bærning (#JPs# 65^15), -bærnes (#SPs#) f. _incense_.

onbǣru f. _self-restraint_? #Gu# 1027.

onbāsnung f. _expectation_, DR 4^34.

onbeblāwan^1 _to blow upon_, #LPs# 104^19.

onbecling (#EPs#) = onbæcling

onbecuman = oncuman

onbēgan = onbīgan

onbēgnes f. _bending, curvature_, WW. [bēgan, bīegan]

onbeht = ambiht

onbelǣdan _to inflict upon_, WW 90.

onbēn f. _imprecation_, BH 104^3.

onbēodan^2 _to command, order_, AO: _announce, proclaim_, Æ, AO.

onbeornan^3 _to set fire to, inflame_.

onbēotend _threatening, impending_.

onberan^4 _to carry off, plunder_: _diminish, weaken_.

onbergan = onbyrgan

onbescēawung f. _inspection, examination_, #Sc# 66^10.

onbescēofan^2 _to thrust out_, WW 220^19,21.

onbestǣlan _to convict of crime_, LL 30 [15].

onbestingan = inbestingan

onbid == anbid

onbīdan^1 _to remain, wait_: w. g. _wait for, await, expect_: _attend
upon, wait on_.

onbīgan (ē) _to subdue, subjugate_.

onbiht = ambiht

onbindan^3 _to unbind, untie, loosen_: _disclose_.

onbirgan = onbyrgan

onbītan^1 (w. g.) _to taste of, partake of, feed upon_.

onblǣst m. _‘impetus,’ onrush, attack_, EHy 5^8.

onblǣstan _to break in_, WW 428^1.

onblandan^3 _to mingle_, #An# 675.

onblāwan^7 _to blow into, inspire_: _puff up_.

onblāwing f. _breathing upon_, JnL p 8^6 (in-).

onblāwnes f. _inspiration_, #Bl# 7^26.

onblinnan (MFH 118) = āblinnan

onblōtan^4 _to sacrifice, kill a victim_, #Gen# 2933.

onbran = onbarn pret. 3 sg. of onbeornan.

onbrecan^4 _to burst upon, attack, destroy_.

on-bregdan, -brēdan^3 _to move, bow, start up_: _burst open_.

onbring m. _instigation_, LL.

onbringelle f. _instigation_, ÆL 23b^291.

onbrosnung f. _decay, corruption_, #EPs# 29^10.

onbryce m. _inroad_, OEG 2480.

onbryrdan (āb-, inb-) _to excite, inspire, incite, encourage_, Æ, CP.
onbryrd _excited, fired, ardent_: _contrite_. [brord]

onbryrding f. _incitement_, WW 419^42.

onbryrdnes (e^2) f. _inspiration, incitement, ardour_, Æ: _remorse,
contrition_.

onbūgan^2,1 _to bend_: _bow, submit, yield, to agree with_, _Bl, Mt_; Æ,
AO: _bend aside, deviate_. [‘_onbow_’]

onbūtan prep. (w. d. a.) and adv. _about, round about_: _round, around_.
adv. phr. west o. faran _to go west about_.

onbyhtscealc = ambihtscealc

onbyrdan = anbyrdan

onbyrgan I. (e, i) _to taste, eat_, Æ. II. _to be surety_, v. OEG 7^99.

onbyrging f. _tasting_, #Lcd# 1·136^12.

onbyrhtan _to illuminate_, #Bl# 105^31.

onbyrignes f. _tasting_, #Bl# 209^12.

onceig- (N) = oncīg-

oncennan _to bear, bring forth_, Æ.

oncer = ancor

oncerran = oncirran

oncīgan (ei^2) _to call upon, invoke_, DR.

oncīgnes, oncīgung (ei) f. _invocation_, DR.

oncirran (e, y) _to turn, alter, change, transform_: _turn off or away,
avert, prevent_: _turn oneself, go_.

onclēow = anclēow

onclifian (eo, y) _to adhere, stick to, persist in_.

onclyfiende _sticking to, tenacious_, Ct.

onclypian _to call upon_, Æ.

on-cnǣwe, -cnāwe _known, recognised_.

oncnāwan^7 _to understand, know, perceive, observe_, _Ma_; Æ, CP:
_acknowledge, confess, disclose_, _Æ_. [‘_acknow_’]

on-cnāwennes (Æ), -cnāwnes (CP) f. _acknowledgment, knowledge_.

oncnyssan _to cast down, afflict_, #CPVPs#.

oncnyttan = uncnyttan

oncor = ancor

ōncra = āncra

oncuman^4 _to come upon, befal_.

oncunnan swv. _to know_, #Gl#: _reproach, blame, accuse_, CP.

oncunnes f. _accusation_, #JVPs#; BH 212^15.

oncunning f. _accusation_, BH 212^15 (#b#).

oncwealdan _to slay_, #EPs# 61^4.

oncweðan^5 _to answer, resound, echo_, Æ: _protest_.

oncyrran = oncirran

oncȳðan _to make known_.

oncȳðdǣd f. _hurtful deed_, #An# 1181.

oncȳðig (#El# 725) = uncȳðig?

oncȳðð † f. _pain, distress of mind_.

ond == and

ondǣlan _to infuse_, DR.

ondǣlend m. _one who imparts, infuser_.

onde- = ande-

onder- = under-

onderslic, ondeslic (DR) = ondrysenlic

ondesn, ondesnes f. _fear_, DR.

ondgit = andgiet

ondlēan = andlēan

ondliota = ondwleota, andwlita  [[“ondwleota” redirected to “andwlita”]]

ondlong = andlang

ondo (NG) = anda

ondōn anv. (1) _to undo, open_ [= un-]: (2) _to put on (clothes)_, CM
390; #Sc# 83^6. [= ondōn]

ondōung f. _injection_, #Lcd# 97b.

on-drǣdan^7 (and wv.) pret. 3 sg. -drēd, -drǣd, -dreord (A), also
-drǣdde, pp. -drǣd (tr.) _to dread, fear_, _B, Chr, Mt_: (refl.) _be
afraid_, _El, Lk_. [‘_adread_’]

ondrǣdendlic _fearful, terrible_, Æ.

ondrǣding f. _dread, fear, terror_, AO.

ondrencan _to intoxicate_, #Guth# 62^20.

ondresn = ondrysnu

ondrincan^3 (w. g.) _to drink_, BH.

ondrislic = ondrysenlic

ondruncnian _to become intoxicated_, #EPs# 35^9.

on-drysenlic, -drys(n)lic _terrible_.

ondrysne _terrible_: _feared, venerated, venerable_.

ondrysnlic = ondrysenlic

ondrysnu = andrysno

ondrystlic = ondrysenlic

onds- = ands-

ondw- = andw-

one = ono

onealdian _to grow old_, #SPs# 31^3.

oneardian _to inhabit_, #CSPs#.

oneardiend _inhabitant, indweller_, GD, #PPs#.

onefen, onefn = onemn

on-ēgan, -ēgnan (oe) _to fear, dread_. [ōga]

onemn I. prep. (w. d.) _abreast of, alongside of, by, near, during_, AO.
II. adv. _together, exactly, directly_. o. ðǣm _at the same time_.

onemnðrōwigan _to sympathize_, ÆL 23b^243.

onerian _to plough up_, Æ, CP.

onerning f. _attack_, DR 36^1. [iernan]

ōnettan _to hasten, hurry forward, be quick_, Æ: _be busy, brisk_:
_anticipate_, Æ, CP.

ōnettung f. _precipitation_, CP 455^15.

oneða † = anda

onēðgung f. _breathing on_, #ERPs# 17^16.

onfægnian _to fawn on_, #Bo# 102^15.

onfæreld n. _going on, progress, journey_: _going in, entrance_:
_attack, assault, incursion_, #Sc# 212^5.

onfæstnian _to pierce_.

onfæðmnes f. _embrace_, #Bl# 7^26.

onfangend m. _receiver_, ES 9·37.

onfangennes f. _reception, acceptance_, Æ.

onfealdan^7 _to unfold_.

onfeall (e) m. _swelling_, _Lcd_. [‘_onfall_’]

onfeallende ptc. _rushing on_.

onfehtan (#VPs#) = onfeohtan

onfell = onfeall

onfeng I. = (+) andfeng. II. pret. 3 sg. of onfōn.

±onfeng- = andfeng-

onfeohtan^3 (e) _to attack, assault, fight with_, #Chr#.

onfillende ptc. _falling upon, overwhelming_, WW 420^19.

onfilte (WW) = anfilte  [[under “anfilt”]]

onfindan^3 (but occl. wk. pret. onfunde) _to find out, learn, perceive,
feel, notice, observe, discover_, CP: _experience, suffer_.

onfindend m. _discoverer_, GPH 391.

onflǣscnes f. _incarnation_, #Bl# 81^29; BHy 2^41.

onflyge m., onflygen n. _infectious disease_ (BT), #Lcd#.

onfōn^7 _to take, receive, accept_, _BH, Lcd, Mt_; Æ: _stand sponsor_,
#Chr#: _harbour, favour unrighteously_, LL: _undertake, engage in_,
_Bl_. onfangenum gebede _after engaging in prayer_: _begin_: _conceive_,
_Ps_. [‘_onfang_’]

onfōnd m. _undertaker, supporter_.

onfōndlic (an-) ‘_accipendus_,’ NC 314.

onfongenes = onfangennes

onforan I. prep. _before_ (time), _at the beginning of_, _Chr_. II. adv.
_before, in front of_, _Ps_. [‘_afore_’]

onfordōn ptc. _destroyed_, #LPs# 101^21.

onforeweard-um, -an adv. _in front, in the first line, in the fore part,
above all_, Æ; A 5·455.

onforht = anforht

onforhtian _to be afraid, fear_.

onforwyrd n. _destruction_, #CSPs#.

onfundelnes f. _experience_, #Lcd#.

onfundennes f. _explanation_: _trial, experiment, experience_.

onga = anga

ongægn, ongǣn = ongēan

ongalan^6 _to charm_.

ongalend m. _enchanter_, #BlPs# 57^6.

ongalnes f. _song_, #BRPs# 70^6.

ongān I. = ongēan. II. anv. _to approach, enter into_, ES 38^20:
_attack_, ES 41·325.

ongang m. _entrance, incursion, assault, attack_.

ongangan^7 = ongān

onge = enge

on-gēan (ā, ē), -geagn (æ, e) I. prep. _towards, against, opposite to,
contrary to_, _Æ, Lk_; AO, CP: _against, in exchange for_. II. adv.
_opposite, back_, _Æ, Chr, Ct, Lk_: ‘_again_.’ eft o. _back again_.
o. ðæt _on the other hand, on the contrary_.

ongēancyme m. _return_, Æ.

ongēancyrrendlic _relative_, #ÆGr# 231^17.

ongēanfealdan^7 _to fold back, roll back_, #Sc# 148^11.

ongēanfēran (agēan-) _to return_.

ongēanflōwende _ebbing and flowing_, v. OEG 2363.

ongēanhworfennes f. _turning again_, OEG 2713.

ongēanhwyrf (ag-) m. _return_.

ongēanhwyrfan (ag-) _to turn again, return_.

ongēanlecgan _to lay up, store up_, #Sc# 156^6.

ongēansprecan^5 _to speak against, revile_, #RSPs# 43^17.

ongēanweard _going back or towards_, AO: _near_, #Bk# 4. adv.
-weardes, Æ.

ongēanweardlic _adversative_. adv. -līce, #ÆGr#.

ongēanwerian _to revile in return_, RB 17^13. [wyrigan]
  [[redirected to “wyrgan”]]

ongēanwiðerian _to oppose_, #Sc# 33^20.

ongēanwyrdnes f. _opposition_, OEG 3975.

ongeboren _in-born_, OEG.

ongebrecan^4 _to attack, ravage_.

ongebringan _to bring upon_: _impose_, CM 36: _enjoin_, CM 1185:
_incline, induce_, ÆL 25^549.

ongecīgan _to call upon, invoke_, RHy 1^4.

ongecīgung (ei^3) f. _invocation_, DR 99^13.

ongecoplīce = ungecoplīce

ongefæstnian = onfæstnian

ongefeht n. _attack_, DR. [feoht]

ongeflogen _attacked by disease_, #Lcd# 1·86^21. [cp. onflygen]
  [[under “onflyge”]]

on-gegen, -gegn = ongēan

ongehrēosan^2 _to rush upon, fall upon_.

ongehrīnan^1 _to touch_.

ongehȳðnes f. _advantage, profit_, LL 476[12].

ongel, Ongel = angel I., Angel

ongelǣdan = ingelǣdan

ongelihtan (AS 2^2) = onlihtan  [[headword spelled “onlīhtan”]]

on-gemang, -gemong prep. (w. d.) and adv. _among, during_, CP:
_meanwhile_, CM. o. ðisum, ðǣm _meanwhile_.

ongemet = ungemet

ongēn, ongend = ongēan

ongenǣman _to take away (from)_, #Guth# 14^11.

ongeniman^4 _to take away_.

ongeotan = ongietan

ongēotung f. _pouring in_, #Lcd# 88a.

on-gerwan, pp. -gered (#VPs#) = ongirwan

ongesēon = onsēon

ongesetenes f. _knowledge_, BB 474^15.

ongeslēan^6 _to slay_, BH 44^17.

ongespanan^1 _to draw on, allure_, WW 421^22.

onget- = ongiet-

ongetǣcan _to enjoin_, CM 363.

ongetimbran _to build up_, AO.

ongeðwǣre = ungeðwǣre

ongewinn n. _assault_, #Sc# 33^17.

ongewiss = ungewiss

ongewrigennes (GD 139^1) = onwrigennes

ongieldan^3 (i) _to atone for, be punished for, pay (the penalty) for_,
AO: _pay, offer (gifts, sacrifice)_. [_Ger._ entgelten]

ongien = onginn

ongierwan (AS 59^20) = ongirwan

ongietan^5 (e, eo, i, y) _to grasp, seize_: _understand, learn,
recognize, know, distinguish, judge, consider_, _Mt_ (y); AO, CP: _see,
perceive_: _perceive by hearing, hear_: _feel, experience_: _know
carnally_: _get, take away_ (āg-). [‘_anget_’]

ongietenes f. _knowledge, understanding_: _meaning_.

ongifan^5 (æ) _to give back_, Æ: _forgive_.

ongildan = ongieldan

onginn = anginn

onginnan^3 _to begin, attempt, endeavour, try hard_, _Æ, G_; AO, CP.
(This vb. is often used periphrastically w. another vb. in the inf., to
denote the simple action of the latter. The compound is best translated
by the historical aorist of the second vb.): _attack, assail_: _act_
(āg-). [‘_ongin_’]

onginnendlic _inchoative_, #ÆGr#.

onginnes f. _undertaking_.

on-girwan pret. -girede I. _to unclothe, divest, strip_. [= ungierwan]
II. _to clothe_, #EPs# 131^16.

ongit = andgiet

ongit- = ongiet-

Ongle (AO) = Angle

Onglisc = Englisc

ongnora? ongnere = angnere

Ongol = Angel

ongong = ongang

ongris-, ongrys- = angris-

ongrype m. _attack_, W 187^2.

ongryrelic _horrible_, #Guth# 36^24.

ongseta = angseta  [[under “angset”]]

ongunnenes = onginnes

ongy- = ongi-

ongyrdan _to unbuckle, unfasten_, BH 196^28.

ongyrnan _to impose, inflict on_, #Sc# 10^4.

ongytan = ongietan

onhādian _to unfrock, divest of holy orders_, LL 66[21].

onhǣldan (#VPs#) = onhieldan

onhǣle † _secret, concealed, hidden_.

onhǣtan _to heat, inflame_, AO, CP.

onhagian (impers.) _to be possible or convenient, be fitting, suit,
please_, Æ, CP: _be at leisure_.

onhātan^1 † _to promise_.

onhātian _to become hot_, WW.

onhāwian _to behold_, ÆL 3^261.

onhealdan^7 (an-) _to keep (peace)_, #Met# 11^42.

onhēaw m. _trunk of tree, block of wood for hewing on_, WW.

onhebban^6 (occl. wk. pret. onhefde) _to raise up, erect, lift up,
exalt_, Æ: _leaven_: _begin_: _take away_.

onhefednes (an-) f. _exaltation_, RB 23^2.

onheld- = onhield-

onhergian _to waste, ravage_, BH.

onheri- = onhyri-

onhetting f. _persecution_, OEG 2^130.

onhicgan = onhycgan

onhieldan (CP) (i^2) _to bend, bend down, lean, recline, incline_:
_decline, sink_.

onhieldednes (e^2, y^2) f. _declining_, #CVPs# 72^4.

onhierwan (u^1, y^2) _to deride, blaspheme_, W 70^15#c#.

onhigian _to despoil_, OEG.

onhigiend m. _despoiler_, OEG 2209.

onhindan, onhinder adv. _behind, backward_.

onhinderling adv. _back_, #PPs#.

onhīscan = onhȳscan

onhlīdan^1 _to open, reveal, unclose_: _appear_.

onhlinian _to lean on_, #Gl#.

onhnīgan^1 _to bend down, bow, worship_.

onhōhsnian _to detest_? (BT) _hamstring, cripple, check_? (Bugge), B
1944.

onhōn^7 _to hang, crucify_.

onhrægl n. _covering, wrap_, #HGl# 490.

onhrǣran = onhrēran

onhrǣs = onrǣs

onhrēodan^2 _to adorn_ (or ? onrēodan = _redden_) #Gen# 2931.

onhrēosan^2 _to fall upon, rush upon_.

onhrēran _to move, disturb, agitate, arouse, excite_, CP.

onhrīnan^1 (w. g. or d.) _to touch, lay hold of_, CP.

onhrine m. _touch, contact_, #Lcd# 1·328^1.

onhrōp m. _importunity_, Æ.

onhupian _to step back, retire_, CP 441^28.

onhwelan^4 _to bellow back, resound_, WW 528^39.

onhweorfan^3 _to change, turn, reverse_, CP.

onhwerfan (y^2) _to turn, change, turn round_.

onhwerfednes (æ) f. _change_, AS 9^5.

onhycgan _to consider_, #Da# 473 (i).

onhyldan = onhieldan

onhyrdan † _to strengthen, encourage_. [heard]

onhyrenes f. _imitation_, CP.

onhyrgend m. _emulator, imitator_, WW.

onhyrian (e) _to emulate, imitate_, CP.

onhyring f. _emulation, imitation, zeal_, Æ, CP.

onhȳrsumian _to be busied with, occupied in_, RB 71^17.

onhȳscan (ī) _to mock at, vilify, reproach_: _detest_: _deceive_. [hūsc]

oniernan^3 (†) _to give way, open (of a door)_: ‘_currere_,’ #BPs#
118^32: ‘_incurrere_,’ LL 410[3,5].

oninnan prep. (w. d.) and adv. _within, into, among_.

onlǣc (Cp 1725) = onlēac, pret. 3 sg. of onlūcan.

onlæc-can, -san _to vex_, #EPs#.

onlæccung (e^2) f. ‘_irrita_,’ #EPs#.

onlǣdan = inlǣdan

onlǣnan _to lend, grant, let, lease_, CP.

onlǣpnes (BH 128^23) = ānlīpnes

onlǣtan _to relax, loosen, let go, permit_.

onlang = andlang

onlēc = anlēc

onlec- = onlæc-

onlecgende _(salve) to be applied_, #Lcd#.

onlegen f. _poultice_, #Lcd#.

onlēogan^2 _to misrepresent_, #Bo#.

onlēoht- = onlīht-

onlēon^1 _to lend, grant, give_.

onlēoðian = onlīðigan

onlēs- = onlīes-

onlic (an-) _like, resembling, similar_, _Mt_; CP. adv. -līce, AO, CP.
[‘_anlike_’]

onlicgan^5 _to lay on_.

+onlīcian (an-; -līcan, GD 75^4) _to compare_: _make like_.

onlīcnes f. _resemblance, likeness, similitude_, _Gen_: _picture, image,
idol_, _WW_; AO, CP: _parable_: _stature, form_. [‘_anlikeness_’]

+onlīcung (an-) f. _likeness_, NC 270.

onlīesan (ē, ȳ) _to loosen, set free, release_, CP.

onlīesednes (ī^2) f. _remission (of sins)_, AHy 9^77.

onlīesend (ȳ) m. _liberator_, #CPs# 39^18.

onlīesnes (ē) f. _deliverance_.

onlīgan (in-) _to inflame_, #Ps#.

onlīhtan (ēo, ȳ) _to illuminate, give light to, enlighten_, _Bl, Bo_;
CP: _restore to sight_: _shine_. [‘_onlight_’]

onlīhtednes = onlīhtnes

onlīhting f. _illumination, enlightenment_, Æ.

onlīhtnes f. _illumination_.

onlīðigan (intr.) _to become pliant, yield_: (tr.) _loosen, untie_.

onlōcian _to look on, behold_, Æ, CP.

onlōciend m. _onlooker, spectator_, Æ.

onlong = andlang

onlūcan^2 (= un-) _to unlock, open, unfold, reveal, disclose_, CP.

onlūtan^2 _to bow, incline, bend down_, CP.

onlūtung f. ‘_involucrum_,’ GPH 402.

onlȳ- = onlī-

onlȳs- = onlīes-

onmǣdla = onmēdla

onmǣlan _to speak to_, #Da# 210.

onmang (Æ) = ongemang

onmearca m. _inscription_, MkL 12^16 (MkR in-).

onmearcung f. _inscription_, NG (e^2).

onmēdan _to presume, take upon oneself_, #Rd# 56^15?

onmēdla = anmēdla

onmeltan^3? _to soften_, #PPs# 88^38.

onmētan I. _to paint, cover over_? #PPs# 88^46. II. _to come upon, find
out_, #EPs# 114^3.

onmiddan prep. (w. d.) _amid, in the midst, at the middle of_, Æ.

onmitta = anmitta

onmōd = anmōd

onmunan swv. pres. 3 sg. onman, pret. onmunde _to esteem, think worthy
of, consider entitled to_, CP: refl. _care for, wish_: _remind_, B 2640.

onmyrran _to mar, disturb_, Ct.

onn = ann, pres. 3 sg. of unnan.

onnhīgan (WW 255^11) = onhnīgan

onniman^4 _to receive, take_, #PPs#.

onnytt = unnytt  [[under “unnyt”]]

ono I. interj. _lo! behold!_ II. = heonu

onoeðung (#VPs#) = oneðung  [[variant of “onēðgung”?]]

onōrettan † _to perform with effort, accomplish_.

onorðung f. _inspiration, inbreathing_.

onoða (WW) = anda

onpennian _to open_, CP 277^8.

onrād f. _riding on horseback_, #Lcd#.

onræfniendlic = unræfniendlic

onrǣs m. _onrush, impetus, assault, attack_, Æ, CP.

onrǣsan I. _to rush (on)_, _VPs_. [‘_onrese_’] II. nap. of wk. sb.
_irruptions_, WW.

onred m. _name of a plant_, #Lcd#.

onrēodan v. onhrēodan.

onrettan = ōrettan

onrid n. _riding horse_, CC.

onrīdan^1 _to ride (on a raid, etc.)_, #Chr# 871#a#.

onriht _right, lawful, proper_: _partaking of_? #Ex# 35^8. adv. AS 13^8.
also -līce, #Bl# 43^16.

onrihtwīsnes = unrihtwīsnes

onrīptīd f. _harvest-time_, ES 39·352.

onrīsan (_Æ_) = ārīsan. [‘_onrise_’]

onryne m. _running on, course_: _incursion, attack, assault_.

onsacan^6 _to contest, dispute, strive against, resist, repel_: (†)
_attack_: _refuse, deny, contradict_: _exculpate, excuse oneself_.

onsæc I. _denying_: _excused_. II. (LL 24[41] Ld) = andsæc

onsægan † _to prostrate_.

onsægd- = onsæged-

onsǣge _assailing, attacking_. [sīgan]

onsægednes (e) f. _sacrifice, offering_, Æ: _oblation_, _(sacrificial)
victim_.

onsægnes f. _holocaust, sacrifice_, #BlPs# 65^15.

onsægung f. _sacrifice_, WW.

onsǣlan _to untie, loosen_.

onsæt I. pret. 3 sg. of onsittan. II. = onset

onsagu f. _affirmation, accusation, reproach_, _Mt_; Æ. [‘_onsaw_’]

onsand f. _sending against_, _VPs_. [‘_onsand_’]

onsang m. _incantation_, GD 73^26.

onsāwan^7 _to sow_: _introduce into, implant_, CM 658.

onsceacan^6 (a) _to shake, shake off, remove_.

onsceacnes f. _excuse_, #EPs#. [= onsacnes, Swt]

onsceamian = ofsceamian

onsceon- = onscun-

onsceortian _to grow short_, MH 104^23.

onscēotan^2 (un-) _to cut up, open, eviscerate_.

onscillan (= y^2) _to give back a sound, reply_, OEG 8^265.

onscōgan _to unshoe_. pp. onscōd _unshod_.

onscrȳdan _to clothe_, #EPs, Sc#.

onscunian (eo, y) _to shun, avoid, fear, detest, hate_, _LL_; Æ, CP:
_put away, reject, despise_: _irritate_. [‘_ashun_’]

on-scuniendlic (CP), -scunigendlic (Æ) _hateful, detestable_.

onscunigend m. _hater_, #Bl# 111^29.

onscunung f. _execration, abomination_: _exasperation_.

onscynian = onscunian

onscyte m. _attack, assault_: _defamation, calumny_.

onseacan (Cp 665) = onsceacan

onsēcan _require, exact_, _Jul_. [‘_onseek_’]

onsecgan _to renounce, deny_: _offer sacrifice_, AO: _impute_, Æ:
_inform_, Æ.

onsēgednes = onsǣgednes  [[headword spelled “onsægednes”]]

onsēn (#VPs#) = ansīen

onsendan _to send out, send forth, transmit, yield up_, AO, CP.

onsēon I. (sv^5) _to see, look on, behold, regard, take notice of_, AO.
II. (A) = ansīen

on-set, -setl, n. _a sitting on, riding on_, GD 183.

onsetenes f. _laying on (of hands)_, MH 84^2.

onsetnes I. f. _constitution, founding_. II. f. _snare_, DR 121^19.
[sittan]

onsetnung f. _snare_, DR 147^7.

onsettan _to impose, oppress, bear down_.

onsīcan^1 _to sigh, groan_, #Bo#.

onsīen = ansīen

onsīgan^1 _to sink, decline, descend_: _approach, impend_, Æ:
_assail_, Æ.

onsit = onset

onsittan I. sv^5 _to seat oneself in, occupy_, Æ: _oppress_. II. sv^5
_to fear, dread_ (= ond-).

onsittend m. _rider_, CHy 4^1.

onslæge m. _blow_, WW. [slege]

onslǣpan^7 and wv. _to go to sleep_, _sleep_, BH.

onslāpan = onslǣpan

onslūpan^7 _to become loose_, W 83.

onslȳpan _to loosen_.

onsnǣsan (LL 69[36]) v. snǣsan.

onsnīðan^1 _to cut up_, #Lcd# (ES 43·321).

onsond = onsand

onspǣc f. _imputation, charge, claim_.

onspannan^7 _to unfasten, unbind, unloose, open, disclose, release_.

onspeca m. _accuser, claimant_, LL 138[1,3].

onspecend m. _accuser_, TC 169^17.

onspornan = onspurnan

onspornend (= un-) _not stumbling_, #Sc# 187^8.

onsprǣc f. _speech, discourse_, GD 332^9 (an-).

onsprecan^5 _to accuse_: _address_.

onspreccan _to enliven_, #Rim# 9?

onspringan^3 _to spring forth, originate, rise, burst forth, burst
asunder_.

onsprungennes f. _eclipse_, WW 225^39.

onspurnan^3 _to strike against, stumble_.

onstæl m. _order, arrangement_, #Gu# 796.

onstǣlan _to impute to, accuse of_, MFH 170.

onstæpe (e) m. _ingress_, #ESPs# 67^26.

onstæppan^6 _to walk, go_.

onstal (= ea?) m. _provision, supply_, CP 4^1.

onstāl m? _charge, reproof_, OEG.

onstandende _urgent, importunate_, #Sc# 111^4.

onstellan _to institute, create, originate, establish, give the example
of_, _Bl_; AO, CP. [‘_onstell_’]

onstēpan (= īe) _to raise_, † Hy 4^38.

onstīgend m. _one who ascends or mounts_, VHy 4^1.

onsting m. _claim, authority, jurisdiction_, Ct.

onstīðian _to harden_, JnLR 12^40.

onstregdan^3 (and wk.) _to sprinkle_, #BJPs# 50^9; #VPs# (i^2).

onstydfullnes f. _instability_, DR.

onstȳran _to govern_, BH 276^11 (v.l.).

onstyr-ednes, -enes f. _movement_.

onstyrian _to move, rouse, disturb, stir, agitate, excite_, CP.

onsund == ansund

onsun-dran, -dron, -drum adv. _singly, separately, apart_: _privately_:
_especially_.

onsundrian = āsyndrian  [[under “āsyndran”]]

onswāpan^7 _to sweep on, blow on_, #Gl#: _sweep away, banish_.

onswarian = andswarian

onswebban _to put to sleep, bury_, #Gl#.

onswīfan^1 _to swing forward, turn against_: _push off, put aside, turn
away_.

onswīðlic _mighty, loud_, ÆL 31^281.

onswōgan^7 (in-) _to encroach upon_, BH.

onswornod _confused_, NC 315.

onsymbelnes f. _celebration (of mass)_, BH 112^8.

onsȳn = ansīen

onsȳne † _visible, evident_.

onsyngian = unsyngian

ontalu f. _claim at law_, TC 302^22.

ontēnan (#KGl# 65^5) = ontȳnan

ontendan _to kindle, set fire to, inflame_, _Æ, Lcd, LL_. [‘_tind_,’
‘_ontend_’]

ontendnes (y) f. _burning, fire_, Æ: _inflammation_, Æ: _incitement,
fuel_, Æ: _passion_.

ontēon^2 _to draw to oneself, assume, undertake_, CP: _pull_: (= un-)
_untie_.

ontēona m. _injury, oppression_, #ERPs# 102^6.

ontige m. _claim, usurpation_, RB 140^9.

ontiht _intent, attentive, eager_, #Sc# 27^2.

ontihting f. _attention, application, aim, intention, instigation_,
#Sc#.

ontimber _matter, material_, Æ: _cause, reason, occasion_, Æ.

ontimbernes f. _material_, MF 171: _teaching, edification_.

ontimbr-an, -ian, _to instruct_, BH.

ontre = antre

ontrēowan _to entrust, confide_, #Da# 269?

ontȳdran _to nourish, foster_, AO 182^26.

ontȳdre _‘sine foetu,’ effete_, WW. [= ortydre?]

ontȳgnes f. _accusation_, LL 22[37].

ontyhtan _to urge on, incite_, B 3086.

ontȳnan (ē) _to open, reveal, display_, CP. [tūn]

ontyndnes = ontendnes

ontȳnnes f. _opening_.

onðæslic (#Sc# 33^20) = unðæslic

onðenian _to stretch_, #EPs# 63^3.

onðēodan _to join oneself to, associate with, take part in_.

onðēon^1,3 † _to be useful, succeed, prosper_.

onðēowigan _to serve_, CM 473.

±onðracian _to fear, dread_.

onðracung (an-) f. _fear, awe_, #LPs# 34^26.

on-ðræce, -ðræclic (an-) _formidable, dreadful_, Æ.

onðrēagung f. _reproach_, ÆL 23b^672.

onðrecan^5 refl. _to fear_, #Guth# 132^208.

onðringan^3 _to press on or forward_, AO: _move, be moved_? #Gu# 1300.

onðunian _to swell up_? _move round_? #Rd# 41^91: _exceed bounds_.

onðwægennes f. _washing_, HL 13^138,154.

onðwēan^6 _to wash_.

onu = heonu

onufan prep. (w. d.) and adv. _above, upon, on_, _Jud_; AO: _beyond,
after_. [‘_anoven_’]

onunder (an-) _under_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

onunwīsdōm? m. _ignorance_, #Bl# 89^10.

onuppan I. prep. (w. d.) _upon, on_, CP. II. adv. _in addition,
besides_.

onwacan^6 _to awake_, AO: _originate from, be born_.

onwaccan f. _incitement, arousing_, DR 74^12.

onwacnian = onwæcnian  [[under “onwæcnan”]]

onwadan^6 _to penetrate into, attach, seize, occupy_.

onwǣcan _to weaken, shake (a resolution)_, _soften, mollify_, CP. [wāc]

onwæcenes f. _arousing_, GD 337^33.

on-wæcnan, -wæcnian (e) _to awake_, CP: _arise, spring, be born_.

onwǣld (N) == onweald

onwæmme = unwemme

onwǣre? adj. _unripe_, #Lcd# 12a.

onwæstm m. _increase_, DR 69^9. [ōwæstm]

onwæterig = unwæterig

onwald == onweald

onwalh == onwealg

onwarian _to guard oneself against_, MFH 171.

onwealcan^7 _to roll, roll round_.

onweald (a^1, a^2) I. mfn. _authority, power, rule, sway, command_, _AO,
Lk_; CP: _jurisdiction, territory_, CP. II. adj. _mighty, powerful_.
[‘_onwald_’]

onwealda m. _ruler, governor, sovereign_: _the Lord, God_.

onwealdend m. _ruler_.

+onwealdian (an-) _to have dominion over, get possession of_, #LPs#,
LkLR (æ).

onwealdig (a^1, a^2) _powerful_.

onwealdnes f. _power, possession_, #ERPs# 2^8.

onwealg, onwealh _whole, sound, entire, uninjured, safe_, AO.

onwealglīce (an-) _wholly, completely_, CP.

onwealhnes f. _soundness, wholeness, purity, modesty, chastity_.

onweard (= and-) adj. _acting against, opposed to_.

onwecnian = onwæcnian  [[under “onwæcnan”]]

onweg (aweg) adv. _‘away,’ forth, out, off, onward, along_, _B, Chr_.

onwegācyrrednes, -cyrnes f. _apostasy_, BH 176 (v.l.).

onwegādrīfan^1 _to drive away_, #VPs#.

onwegādrifennes f. _a driving away_, GD 185^13.

onwegāfirran _to remove away_, VHy.

onwegālǣdnes f. _removal_, BH 446^16.

onwegānȳdan _to drive away, repel_.

onwegāscūfan^2 _to push away_, #VPs#.

onwegāwendan _to remove_, #VPs#.

onwegfæreld n. _departure_, GD 119^26.

onweggewit n. _aberration (of mind)_, #VPs# 115^11.

onweggewitennes f. _departure_, BH 170^10.

onwegnȳdan = onwegānȳdan

onwegoncernes = onwegācerrednes  [[headword spelled “onwegācyrrednes”]]

onwegpullian _to pull away_, ES 43·339.

onwendan _to change, exchange_: _upset, end, overturn, turn aside,
avert_, #VPs#: _change for the better, amend_: _change for the worse,
pervert_: _transgress_: _deprive_: _return_.

onwendedlic _changeable_, #Lcd# 3·164^8.

on-wendednes, -wendnes f. _movement, change, alteration_, #VPs#.

onweorpan^3 (in-) _cast in one’s teeth, accuse_: _turn or throw aside_:
_begin the web_.

onweorpnes f. _onpouring_, BH 118^5.

onwēstan = āwēstan

onwīcan^1 _to yield, give, way_, #Gl#.

onwille _wished for, agreeable_, #Gu# 700.

onwindan^3 _unwind, loosen_: _retire, retreat_, #An# 531.

onwinnan^3 _to attack, assail_.

onwinnende _assailing, aggressive_, Æ.

onwist ‡ f. _dwelling at a place, habitation_.

onwlite = andwlite

onworpennes f. _enticement, allurement, inspiration_.

onwrecan = āwrecan

onwrēon^1,2 _to uncover, unfold, display, explain, reveal_, Æ, CP.

on-wrig(en)nes, -wrihnes f. _revelation, exposure, exposition_, Æ.
[wrēon]

onwrīting f. _inscription_, _Lk_ 20^24. [‘_onwriting_’]

onwrītung = onwrīðung

onwrīðan _to unbind, unwrap_, #Jud# 173.

onwrīðung f. _ligament, bandage_, WW 439^13 (onwrīt-).

onwunian _to inhabit, remain_, #Ps#.

onwunung f. _dwelling-place_: _assiduity_, OEG 75.

onwurpan = onweorpan

onwyllan _to cause to boil, inflame_, #Gu# 362.

onwylwan _to roll up, roll together_, EHy 2^12.

onȳðan _to pour in_, #Sc# 200^7.

onȳwan _to show, manifest_.

open _‘open,’ exposed_, _AO, B, Bl, Jn, WW_: _evident, well-known,
public, manifest, plain, clear_, _AO, Bo, Jn_.

openærs m. _medlar_, WW 137^36. [‘_openarse_’]

openere m. _opener_, A 8·326^5.

±openian _to ‘open,’ open up, disclose, declare, reveal_, _Æ, BH, Ps_;
CP: (+) intr. _become manifest_: (+) _be open to, exposed to_.

openlic _open, public_, _WW_. adv. -līce _‘openly,’ manifestly, plainly,
clearly, unreservedly_, _Bl, Bo, RB_.

opennes f. _openness, publicity_, OEG.

±openung f., _opening, disclosure, manifestation_.

oportanie = aprotane

ōr n. _beginning, origin_: _front_. [cp. ord]

or prefix (lit. ‘_out of_’ = _L._ ex-) is privative, as in orsorg,
orwēna; or denotes origin, antiquity, as in oreald. [_Ger._ ur-]

ōra I. m. _border, bank, shore_, #Chr#; Mdf. II. m. _‘ore,’ unwrought
metal_, _BH, Ps, WW_: _brass_, _ÆGr, Cp, CP_. III. _a coin of Danish
origin_, _LkL, LL_ (v. 2·601). [‘_ora_’]

orað = oroð

orblēðe _bloodless_, WW 397^29. [blōd]

orc I. m. _pitcher, crock, cup_. [_Late L._ orca; _L._ urceus] II. m.
_demon_, #Gl#. [_L._ orcus]

or-cēape, -cēapes, -cēapunga, -cēapungum adv. _gratis, without cause_.

orc-eard, -erd (_Æ, Lcd_) = ortgeard

orcēas _inviolable, unimpugned, unassailed_, #Gl#.

orcēasnes f. _immunity, purity_, #Gl#.

orcerdlēh f. _orchard_. [ortgeard, lēah]

orcerdweard m. _gardener_, WW 333^25.

orcgeard, orcird = ortgeard

orcnǣwe (ā) _easily recognised, evident, well-known_.

orcnēas mp. _monsters_, B 112.

orcðyrs m. _monster of hell, Orcus_, WW.

orcyrd = ortgeard

ord m. _point, spear-point, spear_, _B, CP_: _source, beginning_, _Æ,
CP_: _front, vanguard_, Æ: _chief, prince_; in pl. _first men, the
flower_. [‘_ord_’]

ordǣle _not participating_, WW.

ordāl (ē) n. ‘_ordeal_,’ _LL_. [_Ger._ urteil]

ordālīsen n. _iron used in an ordeal_, LL 388[1].

ordbana m. _(spear-slayer), murderer_, #Gen# 1097.

ordceard = ortgeard

ordēl = ordāl

ordfruma m. _fount, source_, Æ: _author, creator, instigator_, AO: (†)
_head man, chief, prince_.

ordstæpe m. _spear-stab, wound_, #Rd# 71^16.

ordwyga † m. _warrior_.

-ōre v. īsen-ō.

oreald _very old_, #Bo# 102^18. [_Ger._ uralt]

ōred- = ōret-

orel n. _robe, garment, mantle, veil_, Æ. [_L._ orarium]

oreldo = oryldu

orene I. _excessive_. II. n. _excess_.

orenlīce _excessively_, MF 171.

ōret † m. _contest, battle_.

ōret- = ōrett-

ōretfeld m. _place of contest_, OEG 8^50.

ōretla m. _contumely, insult_, GD 200^16.

ōretlof n. _triumph_, CM 497.

ōret-mæcga, -mecg, -mæcg m. _champion, warrior_.

ōretscipe (orret-) m. _infamy_, WW.

ōretstōw f. _wrestling place, place of contest_, OEG.

ōrett- = ōret-

ōretta † m. _champion, warrior, hero_.

±ōrettan _to put to confusion, disgrace_.

oreð = oroð

oreðian = orðian

orf n. _cattle, live stock_, _Æ, Chr, LL_. [‘_orf_’]

orfcwealm (a^2) m. _cattle-plague, murrain_.

orfcynn (i^2) n. _cattle_.

orfeorme (y) (†) _destitute of, lacking_: (†) _empty, useless_:
_squalid, filthy_.

orfeormnes f. _squalor, filthiness_, Cp 488#s#.

orfgebitt n. _grazing_, WW 149^33.

orfiermu f. _squalor_, OET 96^933.

orfyrme = orfeorme

orfyrmð _refuse_, OEG 609.

organ m. _canticle, song_: _voice_.

organa? organe? f., organ-an, -on pl. _musical instrument_, _Æ, ApT,
Ps_. [‘_organ_’; _L._ organum]

organe f. _marjoram_, _Lcd_. [‘_organ_’; _L._ origanum]

organian = orgnian

organystre _player on a musical instrument_, Æ (#Gen# 4^21).

orgeate = orgyte

orgel I. _pride_, _WW_ (o^2). [‘_orgel_’] II. = organa

orgeldrēam m. _sound of a musical instrument_, _Bl_.

orgellic _ignominious_, CP. adv. -līce _proudly, insolently,
scornfully_, Æ.

orgelnes f. _pride_, OEG 1108.

orgelword n. _arrogant speech_, Æ.

orgete = orgyte

orgilde _not having discharged a payment_ (_of_ ‘wergeld’), LL.

orglīce = orgellīce

orgnian _to sing to an instrumental accompaniment_, #ÆGr# 181^2.

orgol == orgel

orgyte (ea, e) _well known, manifest_, AO.

orh- = org-

orhlættre = orleahtre

orhlȳte _without lot or share in, destitute of_, Æ.

orīege _out of sight, not visible_, ANS 98·128.

orl m. = orel n.

orlæg † (e) n. _fate_.

orleahter m. _‘discrimen,’ lack of vice or defect_, v. ES 37·179.

orleahtre _blameless_.

orleg = orlæg

orlegcēap m. _battle-booty_? #Gen# 1994.

orlege I. n. _conflict, strife, war_. II. adj. _hostile, inimical_.

orlegfrom _keen in battle_, #Rd# 21^15.

orleggīfre (æ) _fond of strife_, #Gen# 2287.

orleghwīl † f. _war-time_.

orlegnīð † m. _war, hostility_.

orlegsceaft f. ‘_supplicium_’? #Sol# 456? (GK).

orlegstund f. _time of adversity_, #Sol# 374.

orlegweorc n. battle. #Gen# 2020.

ormǣte I. (ā, ē) adj. _boundless, huge, excessive, intense_, _Æ, Chr_;
AO. II. adv. [‘_ormete_’; metan]

ormǣtlic _excessive_, #Chr# 1117.

ormǣtnes f. _excess, immensity_, Æ.

or-mēte, -mette = ormǣte

ormōd _despondent, despairing, hopeless_, _Bo, Hept_; Æ, CP. [‘_ormod_’]

ormōdnes f. _desperation, despair_, CP.

orn (= arn) pret. 3 sg, of iernan.

orne = orene

ornest n. _trial by battle_, LL.

oroð n. _breath, breathing, snorting_.

orped _adult, active_. adv. -līce _boldly_: _clearly, definitely_.

orrest f. _battle, combat_, #Chr#. [_ON._ orrusta]

orret- = ōret-

orsāwle _lifeless, dead_, Æ.

orsceattinga _gratuitously_, BH 242^7.

orsorg (w. g.) _unconcerned, without care or anxiety, safe_, CP.
[_OHG._ ursorg]

orsorglic (w. g.) _secure_, CP. adv. -līce _carelessly, rashly_, Æ, CP:
_without anxiety or hindrance_: _securely, safely_, CP.

orsorgnes f. _security, prosperity_, CP.

orsorh = orsorg

ortgeard, orcerd m. _garden, ‘orchard,’_ CP.

ortgeard- = orcerd-

ortrēowe = ortrīewe

ortrēownes f. _diffidence, mistrust_.

ortrīewan (y) _to despair of_: (+) _disbelieve_.

ortrīewe _despairing, hopeless_, _AO, W_ (ēo, ȳ): _treacherous,
faithless_. [‘_ortrow_’]

±ortrūwian w. g. _to despair_, _Æ_. [‘_ortrow_’]

ortrūwung f. _despair_, #Sc# 131^3,4.

ortrȳw- = ortrīew-

ortȳdre _barren_, A 11·2^42.

orð (#KGl#) = oroð

orðanc I. mn. _intelligence, understanding, mind_: _cleverness, skill_:
_skilful work, mechanical art_, Æ. [_OHG._ urdank] II. adj. _ingenious,
skilful_.

orðancbend (o^2) f. _cunning bond, band_, #Rd# 43^15.

orðances † _thoughtlessly_.

orðanclic _intelligent_? GD 269^13.

orðancpīl (o^2) m. _ploughshare_? #Rd# 22^13.

orðancscipe m. _mechanical art_, #Gl#.

orðancum _skilfully_.

orðian _to breathe, gasp_, Æ: _long for, aspire to_, Æ. [oroð]

orðonc (CP) == orðanc

orðung f. _breathing, breath_, Æ: _pore_.

oruð = oroð

orwearde adv. _unguarded_, B 3127.

orweg _trackless_? A 19·110.

orwegnes f. _state of being out of the way_, WW 220^34.

orwegstīg f. _out-of-the-way track_, WW.

orwēna indecl. adj. (w. g.) _hopeless, despairing of_, Æ.

+orwenan _to despair_, Æ.

or-wēne, -wēna (w. g.) _hopeless, despairing of_, Æ: _despaired of,
desperate_.

orwēnnes f. _despair_, Æ.

orwīge _not fighting, unwarlike, cowardly_: _not liable to the legal
consequences (of homicide)_, LL 76[42,5,7].

orwīte = orwīge

orwurð n. _ignominy_, #CPs# 82^17.

orwyrð (#VPs#), orwyrðu f. _shame, dishonour_: _abuse_.

+orwyrðan _to disgrace_.

orwyrðlic _shameful_, MH 156^21.

oryldu f. _great age_. [ieldo]

ōs m., gp. ēsa _a divinity, god_: _name of the rune for =o=_.

oser _‘vimen,’ osier_, OEG 10^2.

ōsle f. _‘merula_,’ ‘_ouzel,’ blackbird_, _Cp, Ep, WW_. [amsel]

ōst m. _protuberance, knot, lump_.

osterhlāf m. _oyster-patty_, #Lcd# 79a.

ōstig, ōstiht _knotty, rough, scaly_, #Gl#.

ostorscyll f. _oyster-shell_, #Lcd# 1·338^16.

ostre f. _oyster_, WW. [_L._ ostrca]

ot I. (#VPs#, N) = æt. II. = oð

oter (_KC_) = otor

oterhola m. _otter’s hole_, KC 3·23^28.

otor, otr (_Ep_), ottor m. ‘_otter_,’ _WW_.

otsperning (#KGl# 70^16) = ætspornung

oð I. prep. w. a. and (rarely) d. _to, up to, as far as_: _until_, Æ,
AO, CP. oð ðisum _up to now_, ES 43·166. II. conj. _until_. III. as
prefix. usu. denotes departure, separation, as in oðfeallan, oðwendan.

oðberan † _to bear away, carry off_: _bring_.

oðberstan^3 _to break away, escape_.

oð-brēdan, -bregdan^3 _to snatch away, carry off, rescue, remove,
withdraw_, _Gu_; AO. [‘_atbraid_’]

oðclīfan^1 _to cleave to, stick, adhere_, #Cr# 1267.

oðcwelan^4 _to die_, LL 112[53].

oðcyrran _to be turned from, perverted_, #Jul# 338. [cierran]

oðdōn anv. _to put out (eyes)_, LL 32[19].

oðēawan = oðīewan

oðēcan _to add to_, #VPs# 68^27. [ēac]

oðēhtian _to drive away_, #Lcd# 1·384^15.

ōðel = ēðel

oðēowan = oðīewan

ōðer I. pron. sb. or adj. (always strong) _one of two_, _Æ, AO, BH, Bo,
LL_: _second_, _Æ, Bo, BH, Mt_: ‘_other_,’ _BH, LL, Mt_: _something
else, anything else_, _BH, Bo_: _alternate, next_: _remaining, rest_,
_A, AO, Ps_: _further, existing besides_, _Æ, Bl, Bo_: _another_:
(in pl.) _the rest, the others_. ōðer...ōðer _the one...the other_, _Æ,
Bl, CP_: _other...than_, _CP_. ōðer oððe...oððe _either...or_. ōðer
healf _one and a half_, _BH_. II. (‘_aut_’) = āhwæðer. comp. adv.
ōðerlīcor _otherwise_, _RB_ 87^19. [‘_otherliker_’] III. _word, speech_
(‘_eloquium_’), #PPs# 118^38. [_ON._ ōðr]

oðēwan = oðīewan

oðfæstan † _to inflict upon_: _set to (a task)_, _entrust, commit_, CP.

oðfaran^6 w. d. _to flee from, escape_, _Ex_. [‘_atfare_’]

oðfeallan^1 _to fall off, decline, decay_, CP: _fall away from, be lost
to, be wanting, fail_: _cease to concern_.

oðfēolan^3 _to cleave, adhere_, WW 416^24.

oðferian _to take away, bear off_: _save (life)_.

oðflēogan^2 _to fly away_, #Ph# 347.

oðflēon^2 (w. d.) _to flee away, escape_, Æ, AO.

oðflītan^1 _to gain by legal process_, Ct.

oðgān anv. _to go away, escape_, B 2934.

oðglīdan^1 _to glide away, escape_, #Sol# 401.

oðgrīpan^1 _to rescue_, BH 408^27.

oðhealdan^7 _to keep back_, _CP_. [‘_athold_’]

oðhebban^6 _to raise, exalt, lift up_, CP.

oðhelde = oðhylde

oðhlēapan^7 _to escape_, LL 218[1,11].

oðhrīnan^1 _to touch_, HL 16^228.

oðhȳdan _to hide from_, AO 94^11.

oðhylde (e) _contented_, #Lcd#.

ōðian _to pant_. [cp. ēðian]

oðiernan^3 _to run away_.

oðīewan (ē, ēa, ēo, ī, ȳ) tr. _to show_, _Gen_; CP: _show oneself,
appear, become visible_, _El_ (ȳ). [‘_atew_’]

oðlǣdan _to lead away, carry off, snatch from, withdraw_.

oðrān = oðhrān, pret. 3 sg. of oðhrīnan.

oðrīdan^1 _to ride, proceed_, #Hell# 40.

oðrinnan^3 _to run off, escape_, #Met# 20^138.

oðrōwan^7 _to escape by rowing, row away_, #Chr# 897#a#.

oðsacan^6 (w. g.) _to deny, abjure_, AO.

oðscacan^6 _to escape_, LL 177[6,3].

oðscēotan^2 _to escape, slip off, turn aside_, Æ.

oðscūfan^2 intr. _to move off_, #Ph# 168.

ōðsperning f. _stumbling-block_, #KGl#.

oðspurnan^3 (o) _to dash against_.

oðstandan^6 _to stand fixed, remain, stop, cease_, AO: _stand behind_,
Æ: _perplex, hinder_.

oðstillan _to stop_, #Lcd# 1·82^5.

oðswerian^6 _to abjure, deny on oath_, AO.

oðswīgan _to cease speaking, become silent_, OET 631.

oðswimman^3 (y) _to escape by swimming_, #Chr# 915#d#.

oðtēon^2 _to take away_, #Lcd# 87a.

oðða = oððe

oððæt conj. _until_.

oððe conj. _or_, _Chr, Ct, VPs_. oððe...oððe _either...or_, BH.
[‘_other_’] (= oð ðe) _until_.

oððēodan _to sever, dismember_, #An# 1423.

oððet (#KGl# 61^19) = oððæt

oððicgan^5 _to take away_, #Ex# 338.

oððingian _to obtain by unfair means, usurp_, LL (412^9).

oððon conj. _or_. [= oððe]

oððringan^3 _to deprive of_, AO: _drive out_, GD.

oðwendan _to turn away, divert, deprive of_, _Gen_ 403. [‘_atwend_’]

oðwindan^3 _to escape, get away_, #Chr# 897#a#.

oðwītan^1 _to charge with, blame, reproach with, taunt_, AO, CP.

oðwyrcan _to harm_? #Lcd# 1·384^5.

oðȳwan = oðīewan

ōwæstm m. _shoot, branch, twig_.

ōwana (N) = āhwonan

ō-web, -wef (ā) n. _woof, weft_, _WW_. [‘_abb_’]

ōwēr, ōwern (BH) = āhwǣr

ōwiht = āwiht

ōwisc f. _edge_, KC 3·388^25.

ōwðer = āhwæðer

ōwul = āwel

oxa m. nap. oxan, œxen, exen, dp. ox(n)um ‘_ox_,’ _Ct, JnL, Rd, VPs,
WW_; CP.

oxancelf n. _ox-calf_, Æ.

oxangang m. _an eighth of a ‘plough-land,’ hide_.

oxanhyrde m. _herdsman_, OEG, WW.

oxanslyppe f. ‘_oxlip_,’ _Lcd_.

ōxn f. _arm-pit_, WW.

oxnahyrde = oxanhyrde

oxnalybb n. _ox-heal (plant)_, #Lcd#.

oxstælde _equal to_? _competent for_? Cp 1032. (v. ES 43·314).

ōxta = ōcusta

oxum v. oxa.

oxumelle m. _oxymel_.




=P=


pād f. _covering, coat, cloak_, WW.

padde, pade, f. _toad, frog_, BC 2·377^16; #Chr# 1137. [_ON._ padda]

pǣca m. _deceiver_, #Bas# 40^21.

pǣcan _to cheat, deceive_.

pægel m. _gill, small measure, wine vessel_, _WW_ 124^2 (A 8·450).
[v. ‘_pail_’]

pǣl ?= pāl (v. OEG 19^3).

pæll (e) m. _silk robe, cloak_, _ÆGr_: _‘pall,’ hanging, covering_, Æ:
_purple garment, purple_, _BH, WW_. [_L._ pallium]

pællen (e) _of costly stuff, purple_, _Æ_. [‘_pallen_’]

pællerēad = fellerēad

pælm == palm

pæneg, pæning = pening

-pǣran v. ā-, for-p.

pærl? ‘_enula_,’ (‘_gemmula_’? Wülker), #ÆGr# 304^7.

pǣtig = (prǣtig), prættig

pæð (a) mfn. nap. paðas _‘path,’ track_, _Cp, Chr, Ps_; Æ: _valley_,
_LkL_.

pæððan _to traverse, travel over, pass along_, _Met, Rd_. [‘_path_’]

pāl m. _‘pole,’ stake, post_, _WW_ 334^2: _spade_. [_L._ palus]

palendse (AO), palentse, pal(l)ente f., pālent (Æ) m. _palace_. [_Late
L._ palantium _or_ palantia]

pālentlic _belonging to a palace, palatial_, WW 342^7.

palester = palstr

pallium m. _pallium_, ÆL 36^166. [_L._]

palm (æ), palma m. _‘palm’ tree_, _Æ, JnL, VPs_.

palm-æppel, -appel m. _date_, WW.

palmbearu m. _palm-grove_, WW 488^13.

palm-dæg (Æ), -sunnandæg (_Lk_ 19^29) m. ‘_Palm Sunday_.’

palm-trēo, -trēow m. ‘_palm-tree_,’ _Æ, Jn_.

palmtwig n. _palm twig, palm branch_, Æ.

+palmtwigian † _to deck with palm-branches_.

palmwuce f. _week of which Palm Sunday is the first day_.

palstr, palster sb. _prick, point, spike_, #Gl#.

pandher m. _panther_, #Pa# 12.

panic m. _a kind of millet_, #Lcd#.

panmete m. _cooked food_, WW 409^9.

panne (o) f. ‘_pan_,’ _CP, WW_.

pāpa m. ‘_pope_,’ _BH_; Æ, CP. [_L._ papa]

pāpanhād m. _papal office_, _Æ_. [‘_popehood_’]

pāpdōm m. _papacy_, #Chr#.

paper m? _papyrus_, WW 523^7.

papig = popig

papolstān m. _pebble_, _Æ_. [‘_pebblestone_’; _L._ papula]

pāp-seld, -setl n. _papacy_, #Bl# 205^20.

paralisin ds. of sb. _paralysis_, ÆL.

pard m. _panther_. [_L._ pardus]

-parian v. ā-p.

part m. ‘_part_,’ _ÆGr_. [_L._ partem]

passion f. nap. passione _the part of the gospel containing the account
of Christ’s passion_, OET 444^37.

pað = pæð

pāwa m. pāwe f. _peacock, peahen_, _ÆGr, Ep, Lcd, WW_. [‘_po_’; _Lat._
pavo]

pēa m. _peafowl_, _Ph_ 312. [‘_pea_’]

peall? ‘_defrutum_’ (sc. _vinum_), OEG (v. ES 37·184).

peaneg = pening

pear-roc, -ruc m. _‘clatrum,’ fence with which a space is enclosed_,
_Gl_: _enclosure, enclosed land_, _Bo, Chr, KC_; ÆL. [‘_parrock_’]

pecg m? _pig_? BC 3·223 (pygg? v. #SkED#).

pell = pæll

pellen = pællen

pellican m. ‘_pelican_,’ _Ps_ 101^5.

pen = penn

pending, pene(n)g, penig = pening

pening m. _‘penny,’ coin, money_, _Æ, Cp, Ct, G, LL_ (v. 2·614):
_pennyweight_, _Lcd_.

pening-hwyrfere, -mangere m. _money-changer_, WW.

peningslæht m. _coining money_, MtL 17^25.

peningwǣg f. _pennyweight_, #Lcd# 47b.

peningweorð n. _pennyworth_, _Lcd, KC_ (u^3); Æ.

penn m. _‘pen,’ fold_, _BC_; Mdf. [_L._]

pennig, penning = pening

pentecosten m. ‘_Pentecost_,’ _A, Æ_.

pēo = pīe

peonie f. ‘_peony_,’ _Lcd_ 1·168^14. [_L._]

peorð m. _name of the rune for =p=, chessman_? #Run# 38.

peose (piose, pyose) = pise

pere = peru

perewōs n. _pear-juice, perry_, WW 128^20.

perfince = perwince

pernex m. _a supposed bird_? (mistranslation of _L._ pernix), #Rd#
41^66.

per-sic, -soc, -suc m. _peach_. [_L._ persicum]

persoctrēow n. _peach-tree_, _WW_ 138^1.

peru f. ‘_pear_,’ _ÆGr_. [_L._ pirum]

perwince f. _‘periwinkle’ (plant)_, _WW_.

petersilie f. ‘_parsley_,’ _Lcd_. [_Ger._ petersilie]

pētig = (prǣtig), prættig

peððan = pæððan

philosoph m. _philosopher_, AO.

pic n. ‘_pitch_,’ _Ep, Sc_; Æ. [_L._ picem]

pīc m. _point, pointed tool, pick, pickaxe_, _Cp, WW_. [‘_pike_’]

picen _pitchy, of pitch_.

+pīcian _to cover with ‘pitch,’_ _Lcd_ 10a.

pīcung f. ‘_pricking_,’ _Cp_ 572#s# (‘_stigmata_’).

pīe f. _parasite_, #Gl#.

pierisc _Pierian_, A 31·535.

pigment, pihment (y) _drug_, #Lcd#. [_L._]

pihten _part of a loom_, OEG. [_L._ pecten]

pīl m. _a pointed object, spike, nail, shaft, stake_, _Æ_: _arrow, dart,
javelin_: pl. _hairs of plants_, _Lcd_ 1·304. [‘_pile_’; _L._ pilum]

pilce = pylece

pile = pyle

pīle f. _mortar_, CP. [_L._ pila]

pilece = pylece

pīlere m. _one who pounds in a mortar_, WW 141^9.

pīlian _to pound in a mortar_, WW 114^25.

pillsāpe f. _‘silotrum,’ soap for removing hair_? WW 127^36 (v. ES
43·334).

+pilod _piled up_, #Ex# 16^14.

pīlstæf m. _pestle_, CP 267^2.

pīl-stampe f., -stocc m., pīlstre f. _pestle_, WW.

pīn f. _pain, torment, anguish, torture_. [_L._ poena]

pīnbēam m. _pine-tree_, _Æ_. [v. ‘_pine_’]

pinca = pynca

pīnecwalu m? n? _torture_, W 241^13.

pīnere m. _tormentor_.

pinewincle = winewincle

pingan = pyngan

pīn-hnutu f. ds. -hnyte _fir-cone_, _Lcd_. [‘_pine-nut_’]

±pīnian _to torture, torment_, _AO, MtL_; Æ, CP. [‘_pine_’; _L._ poena]

pinn sb. _‘pin,’ peg_, _A_: _pen_. [_L._ penna]

pinnan obl. case of wk. sb. pinne? _flask, bottle_, WW 97^10.

pīnnes f. _pain, torture_, TC 369^34.

pinsian _to weigh, consider, examine, reflect_, CP. [_L._ pensare]

pintel ‘_penis_,’ WW 292^16. [‘_pintle_’]

pīntrēow n. ‘_pine-tree_,’ _Lcd_; ÆL.

pīn-trēowen, -trȳwen _of or belonging to a pine-tree_, #Lcd#.

pīnung f. _torture, torment, punishment_, Æ, AO.

pīnungtōl n. _instrument of torture_, Æ.

pionie (OEG 56^418) = peonie

piose = pise

pīpdrēam m. _piping_, #Lcd# 3·208^22.

pīpe f. _‘pipe,’ tube_, _Lcd_; Mdf: _wind instrument_, _W, ZDA_.

pipeneale f. _pimpernel_.

piper = pipor

pīpere m. ‘_piper_,’ _MtR, WW_.

piperhorn m. _horn for pepper, pepper-castor_, LL 455[17].

pīpian _to ‘pipe,’ (blow an instrument)_, _NC_ (ZDA 34·234).

piplian (y) _to show eruptions, break out in pimples_, #Lcd#.

pīplic _musical_, OEG 1644.

pipor (e^2) m. ‘_pepper_,’ _Æ, Lcd_. [_L._ piper]

piporcorn n. ‘_pepper-corn_,’ _Lcd_.

piporcwyrn f. _pepper mill_, ANS 84·325.

±piporian, -piprian _to season with ‘pepper,’_ _Lcd_.

pirenisc _Pyrrhenian_, A 31·535.

pirge (#Gl#) = pirie

pirgrāf m. _pear-orchard_, KC 5·284^23.

pirie, pirige (Æ) f. _pear-tree_.

pīs _heavy_, NG. [_L._ pensum]

pise f. (eo, io, y) _pea_, _Cp, Lcd, WW_. [‘_pease_’]

pīsle f. _warm chamber_? WW 186^10. [_Low L._ pisalis]

pīslic _heavy_, NG. adv. -līce.

pistel == pistol

pistol m. _letter_, Æ: _apostolic letter_, Æ. [‘_pistle_’; _L._
epistola]

pistolbōc f. _book of the epistles_, _LL_. [v. ‘_pistle_’]

pistolclāð m. _vestment worn by the epistoller_, BC 3·366´.

pistolrǣdere m. _epistle-reader, sub-deacon_, CM 584 etc.

pistolrǣding f. _a lesson in the church service_, _Æ_. [v. ‘_pistle_’]

pistolrocc m. _vestment worn by the epistoller_, TC 429^22 (e^2).

pitt == pytt

piða wm. _inward part, ‘pith,’_ _Bo_; CP.

placunis = wlacunis  [[headword spelled “wlacunes”]]

plæce f. _open space, street_, _DR, MtLR_. [‘_place_’; _L._ platea]

plæg- = pleg-

plæse, plætse = plæce

plætt m. _slap, smack_, ÆH 2·248^25.

plættan _to buffet, smack_, _Jn_ 19^3. [‘_plat_’]

plagian = plegian

plante f. _‘plant,’ shoot_, _CP, VPs_. [_L._ planta]

±plantian _to ‘plant,’_ _Æ, CP, VPs_.

plantsticca m. _dibble_, WW 106^17.

plantung f. ‘_planting_,’ _WW_: _plant_, _Mt_.

plaster I. n. _‘plaster’ (as medicament)_, _DD, Lcd_. [_L._ emplastrum]
II. = palster  [[II. under “palstr”]]

plasterplatian _to cover with metal plates_.

+platod _plated (of gold)_, OEG 11^61.

platung f. _metal plate_, _WW_ 196^24. [v. ‘_plate_’]

pleagian = plegian

plega (a, æ) m. _quick motion, movement, exercise_, _Chr, Cp_ (æ), _Cr,
Gen, WW_: _‘play,’ festivity, drama, game, sport_, _AO, Bl_; Æ:
_battle_, _B_: _applause_.

plegan, ±plegian (a, æ, eo) (pres. occly. strong) †_to move rapidly_,
_An, Gen_: _exercise, occupy or busy oneself_, _Bo, Bl, LL_: _‘play,’
sport with, amuse oneself, dance_, _CP, MtL_: _contend, fight_: _play on
an instrument_, _VPs_: _clap the hands, applaud_, _El, VPs_: _make sport
of, mock_, _Æ, Gen_: _cohabit (with)_, _Rd_ 43^2.

plegemann = plegmann

plegende ‘_playing_,’ _Shr_.

plegere m. ‘_player_,’ _WW_ 108^9.

plegestōw = plegstōw

plegestre f. _female athlete_, OEG 4735.

pleghūs n. _‘playhouse,’ theatre_, _OEG_ 1752.

plegian = plegan

pleglic (#Gl#) _athletic_: _scenic_: _comic_.

plegmann m. _gymnosophist, athlete_, #Gl#.

plegol _playful, jocular_, ÆL 21^292.

plegscip n. _small vessel_, WW 181^40.

plegscyld (e^2) m. _play-shield, small shield_, #Gl#.

plegstōw f. _playground, gymnasium, amphitheatre_, _Lcd, WW_.
[‘_playstow_’]

plēo ds. of pleoh.

pleogan = plegan

pleoh n. gs. plēos _danger, risk, harm_, Æ, AO, CP: _responsibility_, LL
70[36,2].

plēolic _dangerous, hurtful, hazardous_, Æ, AO.

plēon^5 (w. g.) _to expose to danger, adventure oneself_, CP.

plett f? _fold_, NG. [_L._ plecta]

plice v. plyccan.

plicettan? _to play with_, v. NC 315.

plicgan _to scrape, scratch_, GPH 396.

pliht m. _peril, risk, danger, damage_, _VPs, WW_; Æ. tō plihte
_dangerously_. [plēon; ‘_plight_’]

plihtan _to imperil, endanger, compromise_, _LL_. [‘_plight_’]

plihtere m. _look-out man at the prow_, OEG.

plihtlic _perilous, dangerous_.

ploccan = pluccian

plōg, plōh m. _what a yoke of oxen could plough in a day, a
plough-land_, _Lcd_. [‘_plough_’]

plont- = plant-

plot _plot of ground_, LL 400[3].

pluccian _to ‘pluck,’ tear_, _Æ, Mt, WW_.

plūmblǣd f. _plum_, #Lcd# 86a.

plūme f. ‘_plum_,’ _Æ, Cp_: _plum-tree_, _Cp, Ep, Erf_; Mdf.

plūmfeðer f. _down_, ES 9·39. [_L._ pluma]

plūmsēaw n. _plum-juice_, #Lcd# 3·114^21 (ē).

plūmslā f. _wild plum, sloe_, WW 139^4.

plūmtrēow n. _plum-tree_, Æ.

plyccan only in plice 2 sg. subj. (_IM_ 122) and plyce (imperat.) (_IM_
127) _to pluck, pull, snatch_, NC 315. [‘_plitch_’]

plyhtlic = plihtlic

plȳme f. _plum, plum-tree_, #Gl#. [_L._ *prunea]

pocādl f. _eruptive disease, pox_, #Lcd#.

pocc m. _‘pock,’ blister, pustule, blain, ulcer_, _Lcd_.

pocca (LkL) = pohha

pohha, poh(ch)a m. _pocket, bag_, _CP, MkL_. [‘_pough_’]

pohhede _baggy_, _RB_. [‘_pough_’]

pōl m. ‘_pool_,’ _CP, JnL_; Æ; Mdf.

polente? f. _parched corn_, _Æ_. [‘_polenta_’; _L._]

pollegie f. _pennyroyal_, #Lcd#. [_L._ pulegium]

pollup m. _scourge_? (BT), LL (278^26).

pon- = pan-

pond = pynd

popæg (Cp) = popig

popelstān (_OEG_ 1815) = papolstān

popig m? ‘_poppy_,’ _Gl, WW_.

por, porr, porlēac n. _leek_, Æ. [_L._ porrum]

port I. mn. _‘port,’ harbour_, _AO_: _town with a harbour_, _BH_; Mdf.
[_L._ portus] II. m. _portal, door, gate, entrance_, _MtL, Ps_; Mdf.
[‘_port_’; _L._ porta]

portcwēne f. _prostitute_, NG.

porte f. = port II.

portgeat n. _city gate_, Æ.

portgerēfa m. _‘port-reeve,’ mayor_, _Æ, LL, WW_.

portgeriht n. _town-due_, KC 3·138^10.

±portian _to bray (in a mortar)_, CP.

portic mn. _portico_, _‘porch,’ vestibule, sanctuary, chapel_, _BH, Jn_;
Æ. [_L._ porticus]

portmann m. _townsman, burgess_, _Æ, WW_. [‘_portman_’]

portstrǣt f. _public street_, Ct.

portweall m. _city wall_, Æ.

port-wer, -weora (= -wara) m. _citizen_.

±pos n. _cold in head_, _Lcd_. [‘_pose_’]

posa = pusa

posl, postling m. _pellet, pill_, #Lcd#.

post m. ‘_post_,’ _Æ, WW_. [_L._ postis]

postol m. _apostle_, _LkR_. [‘_postle_’]

potian _to push, butt, goad_, _Æ, W_. [‘_pote_’]

pott m. ‘_pot_,’ _Lcd_ 1·378 (v. late).

pottere m. _potter_, BC 3·49´.

prætt m. nap. prattas _trick, craft, art_, _Æ, W, ZDA_. [‘_prat_’]

prættig (e) _tricky, sly, cunning, wily, astute_, _WW_; Æ. [‘_pretty_’]

prafost (o^1, a^2, e^2) m. _officer_, _‘provost’ (of a monastery)_, _KC,
MH, RB_; Æ. [_L._ propos(i)tus]

prafostfolgoð m. _order or rank of provost_, RB 126^6.

prafostscīr f. _provostship_, RB 124^16.

pranga v. wranga.

prass m. _array, pomp_, Æ.

prattas v. prætt.

prēan = prēon

prēde = prȳde, prȳte  [[“prȳte” under “prȳto”]]

prēdicere m. _preacher_, #ÆGr# 276^1.

prēdician _to preach_, Lk 8^1.

prēdicung f. _preaching_, NC 315.

prēon m. _‘fibula,’ pin, brooch_, _TC, WW_. [‘_preen_’]

prēost (ēa, ē, īo) m. _‘priest,’ presbyter_, _BH, LL, Mt, WW_; AO, CP.

prēostgesamnung f. _community of priests_, NC 315.

prēosthād m. ‘_priesthood_,’ _BH, OEG_; Æ, CP.

prēosthēap m. _body of priests_, GD 302^25.

prēosthīred (ȳ^2) m. _body of priests_.

prēostlagu f. _ecclesiastical law, canon law_, LL 380[2,3].

prēostlic _‘priestly,’ canonical_, CM 667.

prēostrēaf n. _priestly garment_, NC 316.

prēostregol m. _canonical rule_, NC 316.

prēostscȳr f. _parish_, _LL_. [‘_priestshire_’]

prēowthwīl f. _twinkling of an eye, moment_, Æ.

press f. _press_, A 9·263^12.

prica m., price f. _‘prick,’ point, spot, dot_, _Æ, Lcd, Mt_: _small
portion of space or time_, _A, Æ_.

-priccan v. ā-p.

pricel, pricels m. _‘prickle,’ goad, point_, _Lk, OEG_: _jot, tittle_,
_MtL, LkL_.

±prician tr. _to pierce_, _Æ_: intr. _‘prick,’ sting_, _Sc_: (+) _point
out_, A 8·324.

pricmǣlum adv. _by points_.

pricung f. _‘pricking,’ remorse_, _Æ_ 2·88^22.

prīm n? _the first hour (6 a.m.)_: _the service held at 6 a.m.,
‘prime,’_ _WW_. [_L._ prima (_sc._ hora)]

prīmsang m. _prime-song, service of prime_.

prince? _twinkling of an eye, moment_, v. OEG 2369.

prior m. ‘_prior_,’ _TC_. [_L._]

prīt = prȳt  [[form of “prȳto”]]

prodbor (prot-) n. _auger_? MtR.

profast = prafost

prōfian _to assume to be, take for_, LL. [_L._ probare]

profost = prafost

prūt _‘proud,’ arrogant_, _OEG, Sc_.

prutene (ū?) f. _southern-wood, wormwood_, #Lcd#. [_L._ abrotanum]

prūtian _to be ‘proud,’_ _NC_ 316.

prūtlice adv. _proudly, pompously, magnificently_.

prūtscipe m. _arrogance, pride_.

prūtswongor _overburdened with pride_, W 257^12 (v.l.).

prūtung f. _pride, arrogance_, _OEG_. [v. ‘_proud_’]

prȳde = prȳte  [[under “prȳto”]]

prȳdecere = prēdicere

prȳto, prȳte f. _‘pride,’ haughtiness, pomp_, _Æ, LL, OEG, W_.

psaltere (_Lcd_) = saltere

psealm (_WW_), psalm == sealm

pūca m. _goblin_, _OEG_ 23^2. [‘_puck_’]

pūcel m. _goblin_, _GPH_ 394^242. [‘_puckle_’]

pucian _to poke, creep_, GPH 397.

pudd m. _ditch_, GPH 399.

puduc m. _wart_, GPH 396.

pull = pōl

pullian _to ‘pull,’ draw_, _A_: _pluck off (wool)_, _Lcd_ 3·176.

pūlsper n. _reed_, MtL 11^7 (v. A 39·364).

pumic m? _pumice_. [_L._ pumicem]

pumicstān m. _pumice-stone_, WW 148^3.

pund n. _‘pound’ (in weight or in money), pint_, _A, Ct, G, Lcd_; Æ, AO.
[_L._ pondo]

pundar, pundor = pundur

pundere m. _one who weighs_, MtL p2^3.

pundern n. _pair of scales_, OEG.

pundmǣte adj. _of a pound weight_, RB 63^16.

pundur n. _weight, plumb-line_, Cp 264#d#. [_L._ pondere]

pundwǣg f. _pound weight, measure (of corn)_, LL.

pūnere m. _‘pounder,’ pestle_, _Sc_ 95^19.

pung m. _purse_, #Gl#.

pungetung f. _pricking_, #Lcd#. [pyngan]

±pūnian _to ‘pound,’ beat, bruise_, _Lcd, Sc_.

punt _punt_, WW. [_L._ ponto]

pūr _bittern_? _sea-gull_? WW.

purlamb n. _lamb without blemish_, Æ (#Ex# 12^5).

purpl, purple (_JnL_) = purpur  [[under “purpure”]]

purpure f., purpur (WW 152^20) _‘purple,’ a purple garment_, _AO, Mk_;
CP. [_L._]

purpuren _purple_, _WW_ 151^24. [‘_purpurine_’]

purs ‘_purse_,’ _OEG_ 18#b#^36. [_late L._ bursa]

pusa (o) m. _bag, scrip_, Æ.

puslian _to pick out_, #Lcd# 127a.

-pūte v. ǣle-p.

pūtung f. _instigation_, v. NC 316. [‘_putting_’]

pȳcan _to ‘pick,’_ _Chr_ 796#f#?

pyff _a puff of wind_, BDS 24·245; ES 38·295.

pyffan, pret. pyfte _to puff, blow_, v. OEG 1886.

pyhment = pigment

pylce (_A_ 7·30) = pylece

pyle (i) m. ‘_pillow_,’ _Æ, AO, CP, Lcd_. [_L._ pulvinum]

pylece f. _a warm fur garment, robe, pelisse_, _WW_. [‘_pilch_’]

pylewer _pillow_, OEG 56^16. [‘_pilliver_’]

pyll = pull, pōl

pylu (OEG 29^4), pylwe = pyle

pynca (i) m. _point_, OEG 3683. [pyngan]

pynd? sb. _cistern_? _lake_? #Rim# 49.

+pyndan _to impound, shut up_, _CP_ 276. [‘_pind_’]

pynding f. _dam_, _CP_ 276. [v. ‘_pind_’]

pyngan (i) _to prick_, _CP_. [‘_ping_’; _L._ pungere]

pypelian = piplian

pyretre f. _pellitory_, #Lcd# 3·12^19. [_L._ pyrethrum]

pyrie = pirie

pyrige = pirige  [[under “pirie”]]

pyrtan _to strike, beat_, GPH 401.

pyse (Æ) = pise

pysecynn n. _sort of pea_, #Lcd# 71a.

pȳsian = pinsian

pȳtan _to put out (eyes)_, #Chr# 796#f#?

pytt m. _‘pit,’ hole, well, grave_, _AO, Ct, G, LL_; CP; Mdf: _pustule_.
[_L._ puteus]

pytted _‘pitted,’ dented, marked (of a sword)_, _EC_ 225.

pyttel (i) m. _hawk, kite_, WW.




=Q=


qu- is usually written cw-, which see.




=R=


rā m. nap. rān _‘roe,’ roebuck_, _BH, Erf, Lcd_; Mdf.

rabbian _to rage_, W 84^11.

raca m. ‘_rake_,’ _WW_; GD 192.

racca m. _part of the rigging of a ship_, WW.

racente f. _chain, fetter_, _Bl, Bo, Sc_; AO. [‘_rackan_’]

+racentēagian _to chain_, ÆL 31^35.

racen-tēah f. gs. -tēage _chain, fetter_, _Bl_; Æ. [‘_rakenteie_’]

racete = racente

racetēage (Mk) = racentēah

racian (w. d.) _to rule, govern, control_: _go forward, move_, _CP, W_:
_hasten_, NR 28^25. [‘_rake_’]

rācing (_JnL_) = rǣcing

racu I. f. _exposition, explanation, observation, account, narrative_,
Æ, CP: _rhetoric_: _comedy_. [reccan] II. f. (LL 455^15) = raca

rād I. f. _ride, riding, expedition, journey_, _BH, Bo, Lcd_: _raid_,
_Chr, LL_: _modulation_, #Run# 5: _name of the rune for =r=_. [‘_road_’;
rīdan] II. pret. 3 sg. of rīdan. III. m. = rǣd

+rād I. n. _reckoning, account_: _condition, stipulation_: _reason,
wisdom_, Æ, AO: _accuracy_. ðus +r. _such, of this kind_. hū +rādes
_how_. II. adj. _conditioned, circumstanced_, CP: _wise, clever,
skilful_, _Bo_; AO: _straight_, _Guth_. +rāde spræc _prose_.

-rād v. brand-r.

rādcniht m. _tenant holding subject to service on horseback_, v. L 1·73.
[‘_radknight_’]

rade = hraðe

+rādegian = +rādian

rādehere, rādhere = rǣdehere

radelod _having straight branches_? BC 3·44.

rādhors n. _riding-horse_, _HL_. [‘_roadhorse_’]

radian = hradian

+rādian _to reckon with, arrange_, #Bo# 96^15: _call to account_.

+rādlic _wise, prudent, learned_, Æ. adv. -līce, Æ.

+rādnes f. _compact_.

rador == rodor

rādor = rāhdēor

radost = hraðost, v. hraðe.

rādpytt m. _draw-well_? #Rd# 59^15.

+rādscipe m. _discretion_, #Met# 22^48.

rādstefn f. _term of service performed by a mounted man_, LL 456[3].
[cp. rādcniht]

rādumbel = rāradumbla

rādwērig _weary of travelling_, #Rd# 21^14.

ræc = rec

ræcan, ræccan = reccan

rǣcan I. _to ‘reach’ out, stretch out_, _Æ, B, CP, Cr, Sat_: _offer,
present, give, grant_, _Jn, RB_; Æ: _extend_ (intr.), _Gen, Rd, Sol_:
_carry, convey_, LL 447[4,1b]. II. = hrǣcan

+rǣcan _‘reach,’ attain, overtake_, _Bl, Sat_: _obtain by seizure, take,
get, gain_, _Chr_; AO: _address, speak to_: _handle, deal with_.

ræcc m. _setter (dog)_, WW 276^4.

ræce f. (_Cp_) = raca

ræced == reced

rǣcing f. _‘reaching,’ holding out, presenting_, _JnL_.

ræd = hræd

rǣd I. (ā, ē) m. _advice, counsel_, _Æ, B_: _resolution, deliberation,
plan, way, design_, _Æ, AO_: _council, conspiracy_, _Æ, B_: _decree,
ordinance_, CP: _wisdom, sense, reason, intelligence_, _El_; Æ: _gain,
profit, benefit, good fortune, remedy_, _Æ, Met_: _help_: _power, might_
tō rǣde +niman _resolve_, _AO_. tō rǣde ðincan _seem advisable_, _Bl_.
[‘_rede_’] II. adj. = rēad. III. (ē) n. _reading, lesson_, _NG_.
[‘_read_’]

rǣdan^7 (ē) pret. 3 sg. reord, rēd; also wv. (±) _to advise, counsel,
persuade_, _El, Ma_; Æ: (±) _consult, discuss, deliberate, plot,
design_, _Æ, AO, BH_: (±) _decree, decide_, _Æ_: _rule, guide, have
control over, possess_, _B, Bo, Da_: _provide for_: _bring, deliver
(goods)_, _LL_: _have an idea, guess, forebode_, _Æ, BH, Rd_: (±) _read,
explain_, _Æ, Bl, Bo, G_: _learn by reading_: (+) _put in order_, _BH,
EC_ (ē): _help_. [‘_read_,’ ‘_rede_’]

rǣdbana (ē) m. _accessory to a murder_, LL.

rǣdbora (ē) m. _adviser, counsellor_, Æ: _(Roman) consul_.

rǣdda m. _robin_, WW 44^18. [rēad]

rǣdde wk. pret. 3 sg. of rǣdan.

rǣde I. adj. (±) _prepared, ready, ready for riding (horse)_, _PPs_.
[‘_i-rede_’] II. n. (+) (ē) _trappings, armour, accoutrements,
ornaments_.

rǣdecempa m. _horse-soldier_, WW 228^39.

rǣdegafol n. _rent paid in one payment (in money or in kind)_, LL
118[67].

rǣdehere m. _mounted troop, cavalry_, AO.

+rǣdelīce = +rǣdlīce

rǣdelle = rǣdelse  [[under “rǣdels”]]

rǣdels mf., rǣdelse f. _enigma, ‘riddle,’_ _Æ_ (ē): _consideration,
discussion_: _imagination, conjecture, interpretation_.

rǣdemann m. _horseman_, #PPs# 32^15.

rǣden (ē) f. _condition, terms, stipulation_, Æ: _rule, government,
direction_: _estimation_, WW.

±rǣdend m. _controller, disposer, ruler_: _diviner_, #Sc# 75^12.

rǣdendlic _relating to a decree_, WW.

rǣdengewrit n. _written agreement_.

rǣdere m. _‘reader,’ ‘lector’ (ecclesiastical order)_, _A, RB, LL_:
_scholar, diviner, expounder, interpreter_, OEG.

rǣdescamol m. _couch, reading-desk_? WW.

rǣdesmann m. _counsellor, adviser_: _steward_, _EC_. [‘_redesman_’]

rǣdewiga m. _horse-soldier_, WW 228^38.

rǣdfæst _resolute, wise_, Æ.

rǣdfæstnes f. _reasonableness_, LL (306^19).

rǣdfindende _giving counsel_, WW 383^8.

rǣdgeðeaht n. _deliberation, consultation, counsel_.

rǣdgifa m. _counsellor, councillor_, _Chr, LL_: _consul_. [‘_redegive_’]

rǣdgift ‘_consulatus_,’ ‘_senatus_,’ #Gl#.

rǣdhors n. _riding-horse_, Æ (8^233).

rǣdhycgende _knowing, wise_, FT 26.

rǣdic m. ‘_radish_,’ _Lcd_ (e), _WW_. [_L._ radicem]

rǣdin = rǣden

rǣding I. f. _‘reading,’ a reading (passage read)_, _lesson, narrative_,
_Æ, CP, RB_. II. = rǣden

rǣdingboc f. _lectionary, book of the lessons_.

rǣdinggewrit = rǣdengewrit

rǣdinggrād m. _steps to lectern_, NC 316.

rǣdingscam-ol (-ul) m. _ambo, rostrum, lectern, reading-desk_, OEG (=
rǣdescamol).

rǣdistre f. _female reader_, #Gl#.

rǣdlēas (ē) _ill-advised, unwise, helpless, rash, in disorder_, _Da_:
_wretched, bad, miserable_. [‘_redeless_’]

rǣdlic _expedient, advisable, wise_, AO, CP. adv. -līce _wisely,
prudently, skilfully, cunningly_, _CP, HL_: _deliberately, on purpose_:
_fully, explicitly_, GD 102^19. [‘_redly_’]

rædlice = hrædlice  [[form of “hrædlic”?]]

rǣdmægen n. _productive force_, #Rim# 10? (or ? rādmægen)

rædnes = hrædnes

±rǣdnes f. _agreement_: _decree_: _condition_.

rǣdo f. (RB 62^15n.) = rǣd III.

+rǣdod _harnessed, caparisoned_, Æ (cp. +rǣde).

rædrīpe = hrædrīpe

rǣdsnotter _clever, sage_, #An# 473.

rǣdðeahtende † ptc. _taking counsel_.

rǣdðeahtere m. _counsellor_, AO.

rǣdðeahtung f. _counsel, advice_, AO 154^27.

+rǣdung f. _decree_, WW 383^25.

rædwǣn (AO) = hrædwǣn (or ? rǣd- = rād-).

rǣdwita m. _counsellor, adviser_, DD 299.

rǣdystre = rǣdistre

rǣf = rēaf

ræfen = hræfn

ræfn-an -ian (GD) _to perform, do_: _undergo_.

ræfs- = reps-

ræfter (e, ea) m. _rafter, beam_.

rǣge (ā) f. _roe_. [rā]

rægel = hrægl

rǣgerēose f. _spinal muscles_, #Lcd#.

rǣghār _grey (like lichen)_, #Ruin# 10. [ragu]

rægl = hrægl

rægn = rēgn  [[error for “regn”?]]

rægolfæst = regolfæst

rægu = ragu

rǣhte pret. 3 sg. of rǣcan.

ræm = hræfn

-rǣman v. ā-r.

rænc = renco

ræng- = reng-

ræp pret. 3 sg. of repan.

rǣpan (ȳ) (±) _to bind, fetter, capture, enslave_: _yoke together_, ÆL
31^785.

rǣping == rǣpling

rǣpling m. _prisoner, criminal_, Æ. [rǣpan]

rǣplingweard (ē) _warder_, WW 111^10.

ræps == reps

+rǣptan _to bind, fetter_, #Bo# 112^1.

rǣran _to ‘rear,’ raise, build, create_, _BH, Gen_: _lift up, elevate,
promote_, _Bl_: _establish, begin, commit, do_, _Cr, W_; CP: _arouse,
excite, stir up_, _Rd_. [rīsan]

rǣs m. _rush, leap, jump, running_, _Æ, Cr_: _impetus, onrush, storm,
attack_, _Æ, B_. [‘_rese_’]

rǣsan _to rush, hasten_, CP: _enter on rashly_: _rush upon, assault,
attack_, _B, Bl, MH_. [‘_rese_’]

rǣsbora † m. _counsellor, leader, guide_.

ræscan _to vibrate, quiver_, DHy 94^1.

ræscettan _to crackle, creak, coruscate_, _DD, WW_. [‘_reschette_’]

rǣsian = rǣswian  [[under “rǣswan”]]

ræsn n. _plank, beam, wall-plate, raising piece_, _Æ, WW_. [‘_rasen_’]

ræst == rest

rǣswa † m. _leader, counsellor, ruler, guide_: _chief, prince, king_.

rǣswan, rǣswian _to think, consider, conjecture, suspect_, CP.

rǣswum dp. of *rǣs? or rǣsu? f. or *rǣswa? _suggestion, deliberation,
counsel_, #Az# 126.

rǣswung f. _reasoning, conjecture_, #Gl#.

ræt m. ‘_rat_,’ _WW_ 118^41.

rǣt pres. 3 sg. of rǣdan.

ræð- = hræð-

ræðe = hræðe = hraðe

rǣðe = rēðe

rǣw I. (±) (ā, ēa) f. _row, line_: _succession_, _Lcd_ (ā): _hedgerow_.
[v. ‘_rew_’ and Mdf] II. = hrǣw

+rǣwed, +rǣwe(n) _arranged in rows_, WW.

-rāfian v. ā-r.

rāge = rǣge

raggig _shaggy, bristly, rough_, OEG.

ragofinc = ragufinc

ragu (æ) f. _lichen_, Æ.

ragufinc (ea^1) m. _name of a bird, kind of finch_, WW.

rāha [_Cp_] = rā

rāhdēor n. _roe-buck_, _Æ, Lcd_. [‘_roedeer_’]

rāhte = rǣhte pret. sg. of rǣcan.

ram = ramm

ramesa = hramsa

ramgealla m. _ram-gall (plant)_, #Lcd#.

ramm (o) m. _‘ram’ (sheep)_, _Æ_: (_engine of war_), _Æ, CP_: (_zodiacal
sign_), _A_.

ran pret. 3 sg. of rinnan.

rān I. n. _open robbery, rapine_. [_ON._] II. pret. 3 sg. of rīnan. III.
nap. of rā.

ranc _froward, proud, overbearing_, _Æ_: _noble, brave_: _ostentatious_:
_full-grown, mature_, ÆL 35^22. [‘_rank_’] adv. -līce _boldly_, _A_:
_ostentatiously, showily_, _LL_.

rancstrǣt f. _straight road_ (Cosijn), #Gen# 2112.

rand (o) m. _border, edge_? _KC_: (†) _boss of shield, rim of shield_:
(†) _shield, buckler_, _B_ (o). [v. ‘_rand_’]

rand-bēag, -bēah m. _boss (of a shield)_, _shield_, Æ.

randburg f. _fortified city_? #Jul# 19: _shield-wall of waves (in the
Red Sea)_, #Ex# 463?

randgebeorh n. _protecting shield of waves (in the Red Sea)_, #Ex# 296.

randhæbbend ‡ (o^1) m. _shield-bearer, warrior_.

rand-wiga †, -wīgend †, -wiggend m. _shield-warrior, man at arms_.

rānn = rān III.

rāp I. m. _‘rope,’ cord, cable_, _Æ, Bl, Bo, JnL, VPs_; AO, CP. II.
pret. 3 sg. of rīpan.

rāpgenga m. _rope-dancer_, WW 408^25.

rāpincel n. _(small rope), cord, string_, #Gl#.

rāplic adj. _of rope_, GPH 399.

+rār n. _roaring, howling_, MH 16^20.

rāradumbla m., rāredumle f. _bittern_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ rohrdommel]

rārian _to ‘roar,’ bellow, cry, lament, mourn_, _Æ, MH, MtL_.

rārung f. _‘roaring,’ howling, bellowing_, _WW_.

rās pret. 3 sg. of rīsan.

rāsettan † _to rage (of fire)_. [rǣsan]

rāsian _to explore_, B 2283.

ratian = hratian

raðe = hraðe

rāw (_Lcd_ 89b) = rǣw. [‘_row_’]

+rāwan _to cut in strips_, WW.

raxan _to stretch oneself_, _Guth_. [‘_rax_’]

rēac pret. 3 sg. of rēocan.

rēad I. ‘_red_,’ _Æ, Bo, CP, Gl_; _(of gold) Æ, Gen_. II. pret. 3 sg. of
rēodan.

rēada pl. _small intestines_, WW 159^38. [‘_read_’]

rēadbasu _reddish purple_, LL (e^2).

rēade adv. _with red colour_.

rēadfāh _red of hue_, #Ruin# 10.

rēadgoldlæfer f. _plating of (red) gold_, OEG 1070.

rēadian _to be or become ‘red,’_ _Lcd, MtR_; Æ.

rēadlēaf _red-leaved_, BC (Mdf).

rēadlesc _‘rubricata’ (pellis)_, v. OEG 5324.

rēadnes f. ‘_redness_,’ _BH, Bl_; Æ.

rēadstalede _red-stalked_, #Lcd# 1·378^17.

rēaf (ē) n. _plunder, booty, spoil_, _LkL, Ps_: _garment, armour,
vestment_, _Mt_; Æ. [‘_reaf_,’ ‘_reif_’]

+rēafa = +rēfa

rēafere m. _robber, plunderer_, _Æ, Bo, Lk_; AO, CP. [‘_reaver_’]

-rēafetian v. wīn-(h)r.

rēafgend m. _robber_, KC 3·350^26.

±rēafian _to rob, plunder, take by force, waste, ravage_, _Æ, Bo, B, G,
VPs, W_: _carry off, transport_: (+) _strip_, NG. [‘_reave_’]

rēafigende _rapacious_, _ÆL_. [‘_reaving_’]

rēaflāc nm. _robbery, rapine_, _ÆH_: _plunder, booty_, _Bo_.
[‘_reflac_’]

rēafol _rapacious_, #Lcd#.

rēafolnes f. _rapacity_, OEG.

reafter = ræfter

rēafung f. _spoliation, plundering_, AO 84^21.

reagufinc (#Gl#) = ragufinc

reahte pret. 3 sg. of reccan.

reahtigan _to dispute, discuss_, AO 130^26.

rēam I. m. _cream_, _Lcd_ 113b. [‘_ream_’] II. = hrēam

rēama = rēoma

rēamwīn? n. _a drink_, OEG.

rēat pret. 3 sg. of rēotan.

rēaðe = rēðe

rēaw = rǣw

rēawde = hrēawde

rēc m. _smoke_, _Gen, Ps_. [‘_reek_’]

+rec I. n. _rule, government_: _decree_: _explanation_. II. n. _tumult_,
MtL 27^24.

recan^5 _to bring, convey_? WW 420^18: _go, move, rush_.

rēcan I. pret. 3 sg. rēhte _to fumigate, expose to smoke_, _Lcd_.
[v. ‘_reak_’] II. = reccan II.

reccan I. _to stretch, tend, go_, _CP_: _extend, hold out to, give_: (±)
_explain, interpret_, _Æ_: _tell, narrate_, _B, Bo, G_: _correct,
reprove_: (+) _to wield (authority)_, _give judgment, decide, direct,
control_, Æ, CP: (+) _prove_: (+) _count, reckon_, Æ. [‘_recche_’] II.
(rēcan) _to take care of, be interested in_, _Æ, B, Bo, Cr_: _care for_,
_Mk_: _care, desire (to do something)_, _Bo, Lcd, LL, MkL, WW_.
[‘_reck_’]

recce- (CP), recci- = rēce-

-recce v. earfoð-r.

+reccelic = +reclic

rēccelīest (e^3, i^3) f. _recklessness, carelessness, negligence_, CP.

reccend m. _ruler, guide_, Æ, AO.

reccenddōm, reccendōm m. _rule, governance, oversight_, CP.

reccenes = recednes

reccere m. _teacher, ruler, director_, CP: _interpreter_, MtL p2^13.

reccing f. _narrative_, ÆL 30^375.

reced nm. _building, house, palace, hall_.

recedlic _palatial_, WW (æ).

±recednes f. _narrative, history_, _Æ_: _interpretation_: _direction,
correction_. ānfeald +r. _prose_.

recedōm = reccendōm  [[under “reccenddōm”]]

rēcel (v. MP 171) = rēcels

rēcelēas _‘reckless,’ careless, negligent_, _BH, Bo, Cp, W_.

rēcelēasian _to neglect_, _W_. [‘_reckless_’]

rēcelēaslīce adv. _heedlessly, carelessly, inattentively, negligently_,
_CP_ (rēcce-), _HL_. [‘_recklessly_’]

rēcelēasnes f. _‘recklessness,’ carelessness, negligence_, _LL, W_; Æ.

rēcelīestu = rēccelīest

rēcels (ī, ȳ) m. _incense, frankincense_, _Gl, Lcd_; Æ. [‘_rekels_’;
rēc]

rēcelsbūc (ȳ) m. _censer_, WW.

rēcelsfæt (i) n. _censer_, _Æ_. [‘_rekelfat_’]

rēcelsian _to perfume with incense_, #Lcd#.

rēcelsrēoce f. _burning of incense_, FBO 75^19.

recen _ready, prompt, quick_, _Wa_: _rapid, violent_, _Cr, Ps_.
[‘_reken_’]

recendōm = reccendōm  [[under “reccenddōm”]]

recene (i, y) adv. _instantly, at once, quickly_, Æ.

+recenian _to explain, recount, relate_, _Ex_ 525. [‘_reckon_’]

recenlīce (o^2) adv. _immediately, forthwith_, _Gl_. [‘_rekenly_’]

recennes = reccenes

rēcetung (#VPs#) = hrǣcetung

+reclic _circumstantial, detailed, ample_, CP 193^15#c#. adv. -līce
_directly, straight_: _methodically_.

+recnes f. _direction, inclination_. #EPs# 138^3.

recnian _to pay_? Ct.

recon I. _remuneration_, #Gl#. II. == recen

recse = risce  [[under “risc”]]

recyd = reced

rēd I. = rǣd. II. pret. 3 sg. of rǣdan.

red- = ræd-

rēd- = rǣd-

rēde = rēðe

redestān m. _‘synophites,’ red ochre_? WW 47^15.

-rēdian v. ā-r.

rēdon pret. pl. of rǣdan.

±rēfa (usu. +) m. _high official_, _‘reeve,’ steward, sheriff, count
(‘comes’), prefect, consul_, _BH, OET, Mk, MH_.

+rēfærn n. _court house_, MH 124^13.

+rēfland v. sundorgerēfland.

+rēfmǣd f. _reeve’s meadow_, Ct.

+rēfmann m. _official, courtier_, GD 308·315.

refsan = ræfsan  [[redirected to “repsan”]]

+rēfscipe m. _reeve’s office, stewardship_, Æ.

+rēfscīr f. _steward’s office, prefecture_, OEG.

refter (ē?) = ræfter

regellic = regollic

regen- = regn-, rēn-

regn (rēn; _Æ, MH_) m. ‘_rain_,’ _VPs_: _showers of rain_, _Bl_.

regn- = rēn-

regnan = rīnan

regnheard _very hard_, B 326. [_ON._ regin]

regnian I. _to ‘rain,’_ _MtR_ 5^45. II. = rēnian

regnðēof † m. _downright thief_.

regol (eo) m. _rule, regulation, canon, law, standard, pattern_, Æ:
_monastic code of rules_, Æ: _ruler (instrument)_. [_L._ regula]

regolbryce m. _breach of rules_, W 166^22.

regolfæst (æ) _rigid, strict, adhering to monastic rules_, #Men# 44.

regolian _to draw lines with a ruler_, NC 316.

regollagu f. _monastic law_, LL 266[25].

regollic _according to rules, canonical, regular_. adv. -līce.

regollīf (eo) m. _life according to ecclesiastical rules_.

regolsticca m. _rule, ruler (instrument)_, Æ.

regolðēaw m. _discipline of (monastic) rule_, A 10·144^125.

regolweard m. _regulator, director, ruler, abbot, provost_.

regul == regol

reht (#VPs#) = riht

rehte pret. 3 sg. of reccan.

rēhte pret. 3 sg. of rēcan II.

relicgang m. _visiting of relics_: _procession of relics_.

reliquias mpl. _relics of saints_ (reliquium is used in sg.).

reliquiasōcn f. _visit to a shrine_, MFH 172.

rēman = rȳman

remian _to mend_, v. NC 317.

remm- = hremm-

remn = hræfn

rempan _to be hasty, precipitate_, CP 149^12.

rēn (AO, CP) == regn

+rēn (ī) n. _ornament_, CP: _building_, NG.

rēnboga m. ‘_rainbow_,’ _Æ_.

renco (æ) f. _pride, ostentation_.

rendan _to ‘rend,’ tear, cut down_, _Gl_.

rendegn m. _house-officer_, Erf 1137. [ærn, ðegn]

rēndropa m. ‘_raindrop_,’ _Lcd_ 3·278^18.

rene = ryne

±rēne = ±rȳne

renel (#KGl#) = rynel

reng = regn

renge (y) f. _spider, spider’s web_. [_L._ aranea]

rengwyrm (æ) m. _intestinal worm_, #Lcd#.

±rēnian _to prepare_: (+) _arrange, set in order, mend, set (trap)_: (+)
_adorn_. +r. tō bismere _humiliate, degrade_, AO. [*regnian; _Goth._
raginōn]

rēniend m. _arranger_. #El# 880?

rēnig (_Lcd_), rēnlic (Æ) ‘_rainy_.’

+renned ‘_coagulatus_,’ #EPs# 67^16.

rēnscūr m. ‘_rain-shower_,’ _Æ_.

rēnsnægl m. _snail_, OEG 23^20.

+rēnung (regn-) f. _arranging_, WW 371^19.

rēnwæter n. ‘_rain-water_,’ _Lcd_.

renweard m. _house-guardian_, B 770. [ærn]

renwyrm m. _earthworm_, _WW_. [‘_rainworm_’]

rēo I. f. (obl. cases rēon) _covering, rug, blanket, mantle_. [rūh] II.
= hrēoh

rēoc _savage, furious_, B 122.

rēocan I. sv^2 intr. _to emit smoke, steam, ‘reek,’_ _Lcd, Ps_; Æ:
_stink_. II. (WW 244^36) = rēcan

rēocende (ē) _smoking, steaming_, _Æ, Jud, MtL_. [‘_reeking_’]

rēod I. _‘red,’ ruddy_, _Æ, Erf, MH_. [‘_reod_’] II. n. _red colour_,
WW. III. = hrēod

rēodan^2 _to redden, stain with blood_: (†) _kill_?

reodian _to sift_? #El# 1239.

rēodian = rēadian

rēodmūða m. _‘faseacus’ (bird)_, WW 234^25.

rēodnæsc (WW 38^13) ?= rēadlesc

rēofan^2 (only in pp. rofen) _to rend, break_, #Ex# 463.

reogol == regol

reohhe f. _‘ray,’ thornback_? WW 181^6.

+rēohnung = +rēnung

reoht = riht

rēol = hrēol

reoma = rima

rēoma (ēa) m. _membrane, ligament_. [_Ger._ riemen]

rēon I. = rēowon pret. pl. of rōwan. II. v. rēo.

rēone asm. of rēo.

±rēonian _to conspire, plot_, Æ.

rēonig † _mournful, sad_: _gloomy_.

rēonigmōd † _mournful, weary_.

±rēonung f. _whispering, muttering, conspiracy_, Æ: _astrology_, OEG.
[rūn]

reopa m. _bundle of corn, sheaf_, _VPs_. [‘_reap_’]

reopan (#VPs#) = repan

reopian = ripian  [[headword spelled “rīpian”]]

±reord † I. fn. _voice_, _B, Cr, Ps_: _language, speech_, ÆL.
[‘_rerde_’] II. f. sustenance, _food_: _meal, feast_. III. pret. 3 sg.
of rǣdan.

reordan = reordian II.

reordberend † m. _man_.

reordhūs n. _eating room, refectory_, MkL 14^15.

reordian I. _to speak, discourse_, _B, Cr, Gen_: _read_. [‘_rerde_’] II.
(±) _to feed, refresh, entertain, feast_.

+reordnes f. _feasting, banquet_.

±reordung f. _refection, meal_.

+reordunghūs n. _refectory_, WW 328^32.

+reordungtīd f. _mealtime_, GD 145^13.

reosan _‘pissli,’ name of a plant_? WW 300^5.

+rēosan = +hrēosan

-rēose v. rǣge-r.

rēost _rest (part of a plough)_, WW.

rēotan^2 † _to weep, mourn, wail_.

rēote v. rētu.

rēotig † _mournful, sad, tearful_.

rēow I. = rēo (hrēoh). II. pret. 3 sg. of rōwan.

rēowlic = hrēowlic

rēowot = rēwet

repan^5 _to reap_, #Chr#.

repel m. _staff, rod_, GD 20^26 (v. ES 37·192).

reppan = hreppan  [[under “hrepian”]]

reps m. _response (in a church service)_, Æ, RB. [_L._ responsorium]

repsan _to reprove, blame_, #Gl#.

repsung (æ) f. _a division of the night_: _reproving_. [= *ræfsung]

repung = hrepung

rēran = rǣran

+rerding = +reordung

resce = risce  [[under “risc”]]

rēsele f. _answer, solution_, #Rd# 40^28. [= *rǣsele]

rēsian = rǣswian  [[under “rǣswan”]]

+resp n. _blame_. [= *+reps]

rest (æ) f. _‘rest,’ quiet, repose, sleep_, _Æ, Bo, BH, Cr, VPs_: (±)
_resting-place, bed, couch_, _Bl, Chr, MtL, MH, VPs_: _grave_.

±resta f. _bedfellow, consort, wife_, Æ.

restan (absol. and refl.) _to ‘rest,’ repose_, _Æ, Bl, Chr, Lcd, LL_:
(+) (w. g.) _rest from, remain, lie_, _Æ, An, B, MkL_.

rēstan _to rejoice, exult_? #PPs# 113^4.

restbedd n. _bed, couch_, #PPs# 131^3.

rest-dæg (æ), reste-, resten- (Æ) m. _day of rest, Sabbath day_, _CP,
Mt_. [‘_restday_’]

restengēar n. _year of rest from work_, Æ.

restgemāna m. _cohabitation_.

resthūs n. _chamber_, #APs#, BH.

restlēas _‘restless,’ without rest_, RB 121^14.

+restscipe m. _cohabitation_, BH 76^27.

rēsung (CP) = rǣswung

±rētan _to delight, gladden, cheer, console, comfort_, CP. [rōt]

rētend m. _comforter_, W 257^4.

rētu f. (only in d. rēote) _joy_, B 2457.

reðe _righteous, just_, #PPs# (or ?= rēðe).

rēðe _(of persons) fierce, cruel, violent, harsh, severe_, _Æ, B, BH_:
_(of things) terrible, dreadful_, _Bl, Bo, CP_: _zealous_, CP.
[‘_rethe_’]

rēðegian = rēðian

reðehygdig _right-minded_, #Alm# 2.

reðeman m. _usurer_ (GK), #PPs# 108^11. [_Goth._ raðjo?]

rēðemōd † _savage, cruel, fierce, indignant_.

rēðen ? _wild_, ÆL 10^102.

rēð-ian, -igian _to rage, be fierce_, Æ.

rēðig _fierce_, WW 402^23.

rēðigmōd _savage, fierce_, #Met# 25^17.

rēðlic _fierce, cruel, deadly_. adv. -līce _violently_.

rēðnes f. _cruelty, severity, harshness_, _Bl, CP_; AO: _savageness,
ferocity_, _BH, Lcd_; CP: _zeal_, CP. [‘_rethness_’]

±rēðra m. _rower, sailor_, #Gl#.

+rēðre _ready_, CP 306^15.

±rēðru np. _oars_.

rēðscipe m. _fury, anger_, WW 245^17.

rēwet, rēwut n. _rowing_, Æ: _rowing-boat, vessel_, Æ. [rōwan]

riaht (K) = riht I.

rib, ribb n. ‘_rib_,’ _Æ, Cp, MH, Soul_; AO.

ribbe f. _hound’s-tongue, ribwort_, _Ep, Lcd, WW_. [‘_rib_’]

ribbspācan np. _‘rib-spokes,’ the brisket_? (BT), WW 265^24.

rīca m. _influential man, ruler_, Æ.

rīcan (BDS 16^367) = rēcan (*riecan)

rīcceter, rīccetere (Æ) = rīceter

rīce I. _strong, powerful_, _Da_; #Lcd#: _great, mighty, of high rank_,
_Æ, BH, MH_; AO, CP: ‘_rich_,’ _Æ, BH, Bo, Lk_. II. n. _rule, reign,
power, might, authority, empire_, _Æ, Bl, Cr, MH_; AO. fōn tō rīce _to
ascend the throne_: _kingdom, nation, diocese_, _B_; AO, CP: _reign
(period of time)_. [‘_riche_’]

rīcedōm n. _kingly rule_, W 125^9. [‘_richdom_’]

rīcels = rēcels

ricen- = recen-

rīceter, rīcetere n. _force, might, power, rule, dominion, glory,
greatness_, CP: _ambition_, Æ: _tyranny, oppression, violence_.

ricg, ricig = hrycg

rīclic _sumptuous_, AS 38^3. adv. -līce _powerfully_, _Æ, CP_:
_sumptuously_, _Lk_. [‘_richly_’]

ricone = recene

rics = risc

rīcsere m. _ruler_, DR 113^3.

rīcsian _to bear rule, reign, govern, tyrannize_, Æ, AO, CP: _dominate,
prevail_.

rīcsiend m. _ruler_, DR 102^8.

rīcsung f. _domination_, DR 174^10.

-rīda v. brand-r.  [[headword spelled “brandrida”]]

rīdan^1 (±) _to ‘ride,’_ _B, BH, Mt_; AO: _move about, swing, rock, ride
(at anchor)_, _B, Bo_: _float, sail_, _Gen_: _chafe (of fetters)_; (+)
_ride over, occupy (a country)_, _seize_: (+) _ride up to_.

ridda m. _rider, man on horseback, horseman, horse-soldier_, Æ.

riddere = rīdere

-rīdel v. for(e)-r.  [[under “forrīdel”]]

rīdend m. _rider, cavalier_.

rīdere m. _‘rider,’ trooper, knight_, _Chr_ 1085#l#.

ridesoht f? _fever_, NG. [hrið? suht?]

ridon pret. pl. of rīdan.

rīdusende _swinging_, #Gl#.

rīdwiga m. _horse-soldier_, WW 110^28.

rīece = rīce

rīeht == riht

rif = hrif

rīf I. _fierce, ravenous_. II. _generous_, #Kl#.

+rif n. _seizing, catch (of fish)_: _number caught_.

+rīf _garment_, v. NC 295.

-rife v. hege-r.

rifelede _wrinkled_, _OEG_ 18b^78. [‘_rivelled_’]

rifeling m. _shoe or sandal of raw hide_, _WW_ 125. [‘_rivelling_’]

+rifian _to wrinkle_, ÆH 1·614^14.

rift, rifte (y) n. _cloak, veil, curtain_, _Æ, Cp, MtL_. [‘_rift_’]

rifter m. _reaping-hook, sickle, scythe_, #Gl#.

riftre, riftere (y) m. _reaper_, Æ.

rige == ryge

rignan = rīnan

rīhsian = rīcsian

±riht I. (e, eo, y) n. (_what is straight_), _‘right,’ equity, justice,
law, canon, rule_, _Æ, B, Bo, Bl, BH, CP, Ct_: _cause, legal action_, Æ:
_a right, privilege_, _Bo, CP, Gen, LL_: _correctness, truth_. on r.;
mid rihte _rightly, correctly, properly_: _what is due, duty,
obligation_, _CP_ (y), _Gen_: _reckoning, account_. II. (æ, e, y) adj.
_straight, erect, direct_, _BH, Bl, Lcd, VPs_: _‘right,’ proper, fair,
just, equitable, lawful, permissible_, _Bl, Bo, Lk, W_: _true, correct_,
_Bl, WW_: _fitting, appropriate_, _BH, LL_: _real, genuine_, _Æ, BH,
Bl_: _right (as opposed to left)_.

rihtæðelcwēn f. _lawful wife_, W 298^18.

rihtæðelo (y) npl. _true nobility_.

rihtǣw f. _lawful wedlock_, W: _lawful wife_, LL.

±rihtan (e, y) _to set right, correct, amend_, _Bl, LL, TC_; Æ: _guide,
govern, direct, rule_, _Bl, Bo_: _set up, restore, replace, erect_,
_Gen_. [‘_right_’]

rihtāndaga m. _proper (fixed) day_, LL.

rihtandswaru f. _retort, reproof_, #PPs# 37^14.

rihtcynecynn (y^1) n. _legitimate royal family_, AO(y^1).

rihtcyning m. _lawful king_, BH 360^14.

rihtcynn n. _true stock_, W 13^6.

rihtdōnde ptc. _doing what is right_, #Bl#.

rīhte adv. _‘right,’ due, straight (of direction, as in right on, due
east)_, _outright_, _CP, Met_: _precisely, exactly, just_, _AO, Bl, Bo,
Ps_: _rightly, duly, well, correctly, truly, properly, fairly, justly_,
_B, Bl, Lk_: _directly, immediately_, Æ. ðǣr rihte _thereupon,
straightway_.

+rihte n. _right, due_, _Æ, Chr_ (1074#l#): _religious rite, office_,
ÆL. +rihtu pl. _last offices_. on +r. _straight on_. up on +r.
_upright_. [‘_i-riht_’]

rihtebred n. _measure, rule, square_, WW.

rihtend m. _director, leader, guide_.

rihtendebyrdnes f. _right order_, NC 317.

rihtere m. _director, ruler_, _Bo_. [‘_righter_’]

rihtes (e) adv. _right, straight_, KC 3·392^6.

rihtfædrencynn (e, y) n. _direct paternal descent or pedigree_.

rihtfæsten n. _properly ordained fast_, LL 132[8].

rihtfæstendæg m. _properly appointed fast-day_, Æ.

rihtfæstentīd f. _duly appointed time of fasting_, Æ.

rihtfremmende (y) † _acting rightly_.

rihtful _‘rightful,’ honourable_, #Chr# 1100#l#.

rihtgefēg n. _proper joint_, GD 248^26.

rihtgefremed _catholic, orthodox_, BH 456^15.

rihtgegylda m. _duly appointed member of a guild_, TC 606^14.

rihtgehātan^7 _to pledge oneself, swear_, #RPs# 14^4.

rihtgehīwan pl. _lawfully married persons_, LL 22n16.

rihtgelēafful _orthodox_.

rihtgelēaflīce adv. _in an orthodox manner_, CM 1167.

rihtge-lȳfed, -lēfed ptc. _having the right faith, orthodox, catholic_.

rihtgelȳfende _believing rightly, faithful_, #Bl#.

rihtgemet n. _proper measure_, NC 317.

rihtgesamhīwan pl. _lawfully married persons_, LL 22[38].

rihtgescēad n. _right understanding_, GD 56^2.

rihtgeset _duly appointed, canonical_, CM 412.

rihtgesetednes f. _right ordinance_, NC 317.

rihtgeðancod _right-minded_, #LPs#.

rihtgewitt (y) n. _right mind_, MH 192^22.

rihtgewittig _in one’s right mind_, GD 245^22.

rihtgifu f. _irrevocable gift_, LL 366[81]; 385.

rihthǣmed n. _lawful wedlock_, CP (y).

rihthāmscyld m. _main entrance to a homestead_? LL 5[32] (v. ANS
115·389).

rihthāmsōcn f. _actual_ ‘hāmsōcn’ (v. hāmsōcn), LL 614[49,58].

rihthand f. _right hand_, #Nic# 492; 508.

rihthanddǣda m. _actual perpetrator_, LL 188[1,3].

rihtheort _righteous, just_, #CPVPs#.

rihthīwa m. _lawful consort_, CP (y).

rihthlāford m. _rightful lord_, LL.

rihthlāforddōm m. _lawful authority_, #Chr# 918#c#.

rihthlāfordhyldo (e^5) f. _loyalty_, W.

±rihtlǣcan _to put right, rectify, set in order_, _RB, W_.
[‘_rightleche_’]

rihtlǣce m. _duly qualified physician_, W 12^12.

rihtlǣcung (y) f. _criticism, correction_, Æ, CP.

rihtlagu f. _regular legal ordinance_, W.

rihtlic (y) _right, proper, just, fit, righteous_, Æ: _adapted, fitted_.
adv. -līce _justly, uprightly, virtuously_, _Æ, Bl_: _properly_,
_‘rightly,’ regularly_, _BH_: _correctly, precisely_, A, CP (y).

rihtlīcettere m. _downright hypocrite_, W 54^14.

rihtlīf n. _right life, regular union (of married people)_, #Lcd#
3·176^22.

rihtlīflād m. _right way of life_, GD 336^1.

rihtliðlic _articulate_, WW 355^8.

rihtmēdrencynn (e^1, oe^2) n. _direct mother’s line_, OET 651.

rihtmēterfers n. _correct hexameter verse_, A 8·314.

rihtmunuc m. _true monk_, RB 73^19.

rihtnes (e) f. _‘rightness,’ rectitude, equity_, _Ps_:
_perpendicularity, straightness_, _WW_: _reckoning, account_,
_MtL_ (e): (+) _correction_.

rihtnorðanwind m. _north wind_, AO 17^17 (y).

rihtraciend m. _expounder of righteousness (the preacher,
Ecclesiastes)_, GD 264^27.

rihtracu (y) f. _correct account_, TC 170^4: _right reason_, GD 262.

+rihtreccan _to guide, direct_, AS 26^7.

rihtregul m. _right rule, canon_, OEG 5304.

rihtryne m. _right or straight course_.

rihtscīr (LL 252^21) = rihtscriftscīr

rihtscrīfend m. _jurisconsult, lawyer_, WW.

rihtscriftscīr f. _properly assigned district of a confessor_.

rihtscylling m. _shilling of sterling money_, LL (222^7).

rihtscytte (y) _sure of aim_, #Cra# 51.

rihtsmēaung (e^1) f. _right reasoning or argument_, MtL p9^10.

rihtstefn f. _ordinary voice_, GD 28^28.

riht-tīd f., -tima m. _proper time_.

riht-ðēow, -ðēowa m. _lawful slave_, GD 180^6.

rihtung f. _action of guiding aright, direction, order, rule, guidance_,
_Æ, RB_: _correction, reproof_, Æ: _body of rights, privilege_?
_privileged district_? #Chr# 983#e#: _‘regularis’ (in computation)_.
[‘_righting_’]

rihtungðrēd m. _plumb-line_, WW 150^41.

rihtweg m. _right way_, W.

rihtwer m. _lawful husband_: _legally correct_ ‘wergild,’ LL 466; 467.

rihtwestende m. _extreme western limit_, AO 8^32 (y^1).

rihtwīf n. _lawful wife_, LL 348[54,1].

rihtwillende _wishing to do right_, #Bo# 11^17.

rihtwīs _‘righteous,’ just_, _Bl, Bo, Chr_; CP: _right, justifiable_,
_Bl_.

rihtwīsend m. _Sadducee_, Mt 3^7.

rihtwīsian _to make ‘righteous,’ justify_, _Lk, VPs_; Æ: _direct aright,
rule_.

rihtwīslic _righteous_, CP (y). adv. -līce _rightly, reasonably_, _Bo_.
[‘_righteously_’]

rihtwīsnes f. _‘righteousness,’ justice_, _Mt_: _rightness, reason_:
_righteous acts_, _Æ_.

+rihtwīsung f. _justification_.

rihtwrītere m. _correct writer_, #Gl#.

rihtwuldriende _orthodox_, BH 310^33#b#.

rihtwyrðe _proper, fitting_, AS 13^25.

rihtymbren n. _duly appointed Ember tide_, W 117.

rihtymbrendagas mp. _duly appointed Ember days_, W 117.

rīm- = hrīm-

±rīm n. _number, counting, reckoning_, _VPs_; Æ, AO, CP. [‘_rime_’]

rima m. _‘rim,’ verge, border, coast_, _Cp, WW_.

rīman (±) _to count, number_, _AO, Ps_; Æ: _tell, enumerate, relate_,
CP: _account, esteem as_. [‘_rime_’]

rīmāð m. _oath by a number of persons_, LL 154[9].

+rīmbōc _calendar_, ÆH 1·98^28.

±rīmcræft m. _arithmetic_: _calendar_, ÆL 10^1.

rīmcræftig _skilled in reckoning_.

rīmcræftiga m. _one skilful at figures_, A 8·301^33.

-rīme v. earfoð-r.

rīmforst = hrīmforst

rīmge-tæl, -tel † n. _number_.

rimpan v. +rumpen.

rimpel _wrinkle_. [cf. hrympelle]

  [[From first edition. The entry for “hrympelle” has the same
  definition, with bracketed cross-reference [?= rimpel].]]

rīmre m. _reckoner, calculator_, A 8·307^34.

rīmtæl = rīmgetæl

rīmtalu f. _number_, #El# 820.

+rīn (NG) = +rēn

rīnan^1 (and wv.) impers. and intr. _to rain_, (impers.) _Æ, Bl_;
(intr.) _Bl, Lk, VPs_. [‘_rine_’; regn]

+rīnan = +hrīnan

rinc m. _man, warrior, hero_, _B, Cr, Met_. [‘_rink_’]

rincgetæl n. _number of men_, #Ex# 234.

rincsetl (#HGl# 489) = hringsetl

rind, rinde f. _‘rind,’ bark, outside_, _Bo, Cr, Lcd_; CP: _crust_, _Æ_.

-rindan, -rindran v. be-r.

rindeclifer f. _wood-pecker_? _nut-hatch_? WW 427^29.

rinden _of bark_, GPH 390.

rindlēas _having no bark_, WW 190^31.

rīne = rȳne

ring = bring

rīning = hrīning

±rinnan^3 _to ‘run,’ flow_, _Cp, Cr, Ps, Sat_: (+) _run together, blend,
coagulate_. [= iernan]

rinnelle f. _runnel, rivulet, stream_. [rynele?]
  [[headword spelled “rynel”]]

±rīp n. _harvest_, _BH, Chr, Mt_: _cut corn, sheaf_: _ripeness,
maturity_, #PPs# 118^147. [‘_ripe_,’ ‘_reap_’]

rīpan I. (±) (ēo, ȳ) _to ‘reap,’_ _Æ, AO, Chr, CP, G_. II. (AS 10^5) =
rīpian

rīpe _‘ripe,’ mature_, _BH, Bo_.

rīpemann m. _reaper_, _MtL_ (hr-). [‘_reapman_’]

rīpere m. ‘_reaper_,’ _Mt_.

rīpian _to become ‘ripe,’ ripen_, _A, Æ_.

rīpīsern n. _sickle_, MtLR 4^29.

rīpnes f. _‘ripeness,’ harvest_, _LPs_.

riptere = riftere  [[under “riftre”]]

rīptīma m. _time of harvest_, _Mt_. [‘_reaptime_’]

rīpung f. _ripening, ripeness, maturity_, _A, RB, VPs_. [‘_riping_’]

+rīs n. _fury_, #Gl#.

±rīsan^1 I. (usu. +) _to ‘rise,’ stand up_, _Ps_: _be fit, be proper_,
_Æ, Gu_. [‘_irise_’] II. _to seize, carry off_.

risc, risce (e; = y) f. ‘_rush_,’ _Cp_; Mdf. [_L._]

riscbedd n. _bed of rushes_, _EC_. [v. ‘_rush_’]

riscen _made of rushes_, _Æ_. [‘_rushen_’]

risclēac n. _rush leek, rush garlic_, WW 356^36.

riscðȳfel m. _rush-bed_, Ct, #Gl#.

risen- = risn-

+risen _seizure_, #Guth# 78^5. [rīsan]

rīsende? _rapacious_, #Bl# 225^17.

+risenlic _convenient, suitable, becoming_, AO, CP. adv. -līce.

risiendum ‘_odorato_’? OEG 23^4.

±risne _fit, meet, proper, convenient_.

+risnes f. _congruity_, WW 383^16.

+risnian _to agree, accord_, WW 336^37.

+risnu np. _what is fitting, due, dignities_, AO.

risoda m. _rheum_, #Lcd# 2·282^11.

rīt pres. 3 sg. of rīdan.

rið f. _favour, indulgence_, #Sc# 224^7.

rīð fm., rīðe? f. _rivulet, stream_, _Æ, Bo, CP_; Mdf. [‘_rithe_’]

rīðfald m. _cattle-pen, cow-shed_, WW 195^34. [hrīð-]

rīðig n. _streamlet_, Mdf.

riðða = ryðða

rix (_Æ_) = risc

rīxian (Æ) = rīcsian

rō = rōw II.

roc n. _what is chewed, cud_, WW.

rocc m. _over-garment, rochet_. [_Ger._ rock]

roccettan, rocettan _to eructate, belch forth, utter_, NG, #VPs#.

roccian _to rock (a child)_, #Kl# 101^108.

rōd f. _‘rood,’ cross, gallows_, _Æ, Ct, G, MH_; CP: _rood (land
measure)_, _plot of land of a square rod_, _BC_ (Mdf).

rōdbīgenga m. _worshipper of the cross_, WW 216^16.

rōdbora m. _cross-bearer_, GPH 389.

rodd m? _‘rod,’ stick (to beat with)_, _HL_ 15^110 (v. late).

rōdegealga m. _cross_, MP 1·610.

rōdehengen f. _hanging, crucifixion_, Æ.

roder = rodor

rōdewyrðe _deserving hanging_, HL 18^389.

+rōdfæstnian _to crucify_.

rodor (a) m., gs. rod(o)res _ether, sky, heavens, firmament_, Æ, CP.

rodorbeorht _heaven-bright_, #Da# 369.

rodorcyning † m. _king of heaven_.

rodorlic _of the heavens, heavenly, celestial_, Æ.

rodorlīhtung (roder-) f. _dawn_, #LPs#.

rodorstōl (a^1) m. _heavenly throne_, #Gen# 749.

rodortorht _heavenly-bright_, #Gen# 1416.

rodortungol n. _star of heaven_, #Gen# 1667.

rōdwurðiend m. _cross-worshipper_, #HGl# 403^30.

roeðe (Cp, NG) = rēðe

rōf † _vigorous, strong, brave, noble, renowned_.

rofen pp. of rēofan.

rōflēas = hrōflēas

rogian _to flourish_, #GnE# 119.

rōhte pret. 3 sg. of rēcan.

rom = ramm

Rōm, Rōmeburg f. _Rome_, AO.

Rōmān f. _Italy_.

Rōmān-e, -an pl. _Romans_, AO.

rōmānisc _Roman_, Æ, AO.

Rōm-feoh, -gesceot (_LL_) n., -penig (_LL, W_) m. _‘Rome-penny’,
‘Romescot’, Peter’s pence_.

rōmian (w. g.) _to possess_? #Gen# 350.

romm = ramm

Rōmwalh (u^1) m. _inhabitant of Rome_. [wealh]

Rōm-ware (AO), -waran pl. _inhabitants of Rome, Romans_.

rond = rand

rop I.? _broth_, WW 272^9. II. = ropp

rōp _liberal_, #Rd# 58^3.

rōpnes f. _liberality_, WW.

ropp m. _intestines_, _Lcd, WW_ (hr-). [‘_rope_’]

ropwærc m. _colic_, WW 211^12.

rōrend = rōwend

rōsbedd _rose-bed_, OEG 23^8.

rōse, rose f. ‘_rose_’ _A, Æ, Bl, Bo, MH_. [_L._ rosa]

rōsen _made of roses_, _Lcd_: _rose-coloured, rosy_, _Æ, ZDA_.
[‘_rosen_’]

rōsig _rosy_, ÆH 2·334^30.

+rōsod _roseate_, OEG 3278.

rost = rust  [[headword spelled “rūst”]]

+rostian _to roast, dry_, WW.

rot = hrot

rōt _glad, cheerful, bright_: _noble, excellent_.

rōt(e)? ‘_root_,’ _NC_ 318.

rōtfæst _(root-fast), firmly established_, #Chr# 1127. [_ON._ rōt]

rōthwīl f. _time of refreshing_, #PPs#.

rotian ‘_to rot_’, _putrefy_, _Æ, CP, Lcd_.

rōtlīce _gladly, cheerfully_, BH 348^3.

rōtnes f. _gladness, cheerfulness_, DR: _refuge, protection_, #Pss#.

rōtsian _to make sad, afflict_, CP 417^9.

rōtsung f. _refuge, protection, comfort_, #EPs# 9^10.

rotung f. _corruption, ulcer_, WW 114^14. [rotian]

rōðer I. m. _rower, sailor_, CP. [rōwan] II. = rōðor

roðhund m. _mastiff_, WW. [ryðða]

rōðor n., gs. rōðres _oar, scull_, _CP, WW_. [‘_rudder_’]

rōðra = rēðra

rōw I. _quiet, calm, gentle, soft, mild_, CP. II. f. _quietness, rest_.
[_Ger._ ruhe]

±rōwan^7 pret. pl. rēowon, rēon _to go by water_, _‘row,’ sail, swim_,
_LkL (hr-)_, _WW_; Æ.

rōwend m. _rower_, CP: _sailor_, Æ.

rōwett = rēwet

rōwnes f. _rowing_, BH 384^22.

rōwung f. ‘_rowing_,’ _NG_.

rudduc m. _robin_, _WW_. [‘_ruddock_’]

rūde I. m. _scabbiness, scab_, WW 161^14 (= *hrūda? A 30·253). II. f.
_rue_. [_L._ ruta]

rudig _rubicund, ‘ruddy,’_ _OEG_ 2932.

rudon pret. pl. of rēodan.

rudu f. _red colour_, _ApT_: _ruddy complexion_, _WW_: _red cosmetic_,
_ÆL_. [‘_rud_’]

rues = ryges gs. of ryge.

rūg = rūh

rugern m. _month of rye-harvest, August_? LL 12 Pro.

rūh gs. rūwes ‘_rough_,’ _Guth, Rd_; Æ: _coarse (of cloth)_: _hairy,
shaggy_, _Æ_: _undressed, untamed_, _WW_.

ruhha? m. _ray (fish)_, NC 324 (suhha). [‘_rough_’]

rūm I. adj. (±) _roomy, wide, long, spacious, ample, large, liberal_,
_B, Bo, Mt, VPs_; Æ, CP: _unfettered, open, unrestricted, loose_:
_noble, august_. II. m. (±) _space (extent or time), ‘room,’_ _Gen, Lk_:
_scope, opportunity_, _B, Met_. on +rum _at large, apart_.

+ruma † m. _space, place_.

rūman = rȳman

rūme (once +) adv. _widely, spaciously, roomily, amply, liberally,
extensively, abundantly_, _Gen, Lcd_: _light-heartedly_: _in detail_,
#Jul# 314. [‘_room_’]

rūmed- = rūmmōd-

rūmgāl _revelling in release from confinement (Noah’s dove)_, #Gen#
1466. adv. -līce _widely_, NC 318.

rūmgifa (eo^2) m. _bountiful giver_, BH 194^33.

rūmgiful (y^2) _bountiful_, Æ, CP.

rūmgifulnes f. _liberality, bounty, profusion_, Æ.

rūmheort _large-hearted, generous_: _free from care_.

rūmheortnes f. _liberality_.

rūmian _to become clear of obstructions_, _Lcd_ 1·76^13. [‘_room_’]

rūmlic _benign, liberal_: _plentiful_, Æ. adv. +rūmlīce _at large,
fully, kindly, liberally, abundantly_, _Æ, Bl, MtL_. [‘_roomly_’]

rūmmōd _liberal, lavish, kind_, CP.

rūmmōdlic _ample, large, full, liberal, gracious_. adv. -līce.

rūmmōdnes f. _large-heartedness, liberality, kindness_.

rūmnes f. _breadth, abundance_, Æ.

rūmōd = rūmmōd

rūmor adv. comp. _still further_.

+rumpen _twisted, wrinkled_? WW 366^40.

rūmwelle _spacious_, MtL 7^13.

rūn f. _mystery, secrecy, secret_, _El, JnL_: _counsel, consultation_,
_B, KC, Wa_: _(secret) council_: _runic character, letter_, _BH_:
_writing_, _An, Da_. [‘_roun_’]

+rūna m. _councillor_, #Gl#.

rūncofa m. _chamber of secrets, breast, bosom_, #Met# 22^59.

rūncræftig _skilled in mysteries_, #Da# 734.

rūnere m. _whisperer, tale-bearer_, _Æ_. [‘_rouner_’]

rūnian _to whisper, murmur, talk secrets, conspire_, _Æ, Ps, Sol_.
[‘_round_’]

rūniende _whispering_, WW 441. [‘_rouning_’]

runl _foul_? _running_? #Lcd# 3·36^17. [?= *hrunol]

rūnlic _mystical_, MtL p5^11.

-runn v. cȳs-gerunn.

+runnen pp. of +rinnan.

+runnenes f. _that has been cooled or congealed_, GPH 398.

rūnstæf m. _runic letter, rune_, _Æ, B_. [‘_rune-stave_’]

rūnung f. _whispering, wheedling_, _Æ_. [‘_rouning_’]

rūnwita † m. _private adviser, counsellor, wise man_.

rūst m. ‘_rust_,’ _Cp, MtL, RB_: _moral canker_, _CP, HL_.

rūstig ‘_rusty_,’ AO 251^21.

rūte = rūde

rūwa m., rūwe f. _covering, tapestry_.

rūwes v. rūh.

rūxlan _to make a noise_, MtR 9^23. [hrūxl]

ryc- = rec-

rȳc- = rēc-

rȳcð pres. 3 sg. of rēocan.

rȳd (LL 192, 2#b#) = rād I.

-ryddan, -rydran v. ā-r.

+rȳd(e)? _prepared, ready_.

ryden n. _name of a plant_, #Lcd# 122a.

rȳderian v. ā-r.

rȳe = rȳhe

rȳfe _‘rife,’ frequent_, _Lcd_ (v. late).

ryft (i, e) n. _covering, veil, curtain, cloak_, CP.

ryge (i) m. ‘_rye_,’ _Cp_.

rygen (i) _made of rye_, _Lcd_. [‘_ryen_’]

rȳhe f. _rug, blanket_, #Gl#.

ryht == riht

rȳm- = rīm-

±rȳman (ē) _to clear, open up_, _A, B, Lk, Met, W_: _widen, extend,
prolong, enlarge_, _Æ, CP_: _make room, retire, retreat, yield_, _Æ_.
[‘_rime_’; rūm]

rȳmet n. _room, space, extent_, Æ: _comfort, benefit_.

rȳmetlēast f. _want of room_, ÆH 1·34^22.

rȳmð f. _amplitude_, CM 17.

rȳn, rȳnan _to roar, rage_.

ryne (e) m. _running, onward course_, _A, Æ, Bo, VHy_; AO: _flux, flow
(water, blood)_, _Lk_; Æ: _period of time, cycle, course of life_:
_expanse, extent_: _orbit_. [‘_rune_’]

±rȳne n. _mystery, dark saying_.

rynegiest m. _running spirit_ (= _lightning_)? _rain-foe_? (Tupper),
#Rd# 4^58.

-rȳnegu v. hel-r.

rynel (e) m. _runnel, stream_, _Bl, GD, VPs_: _runner, messenger_, Æ.
[‘_rindle_’]

±rȳnelic _mystical_. adv. -līce.

rynelīce? ‘_cursim_,’ OEG 7^90.

rȳnemann ‡ m. _one skilled in mysteries_.

rynestrong _strong in running_, #Rd# 20^7.

ryneswift † _swift in running_.

ryneðrāg f. _space of time_, #Gu# 184.

rynewǣn † m. _swift vehicle, chariot_.

ryng- = reng-

rȳnig _good in counsel_? #Cra# 51. [rūn]

ryniga? m. _liquid that runs off_? #Lcd#.

rynning f. _rennet_, WW 128^43.

rȳnstæf (MF 172) = rūnstæf

rȳp = rīp

±rȳpan I. _to spoil, plunder, rob_, _Chr, MtL, LL, W_. [‘_ripe_’] II.
pl. _sheaves_, #CSPs#. III. = rǣpan. IV. = rīpan

rȳpere m. _robber, plunderer_.

rȳping m. _plunder, spoliation_, OEG 3149. [‘_riping_’]

ryplen? _made of broom_. [A 31·536]

ryps = reps

-rȳric v. sǣ-r.

rysc- = risc-

rysel, rysl (Æ), rys(e)le m. _lard, fat_.

+rysen-, +rysn- = +risn-

rȳsig (OEG 8^337) = hrīsig

ryt _rubbish for burning, underwood_, LL 36[27].

rȳð I. = rīð. II. pres. 3 sg. of rȳn.

rȳðer = hrīðer

ryðða m. _a species of dog, mastiff_, Æ. [_Ger._ rüde]




=S=


sā m. _tub, bucket_, _Gl_. [_ON._ sār; v. ‘_say_’]

saban m? _sheet_, WW 502^33.

sac = (1) sacu; (2) sæc

saca nap. of sacu.

±saca m. _opponent, foe_, Æ.

sacan^6 _to struggle, dispute, disagree, wrangle, fight_: _accuse,
blame, bring a criminal or civil action against any one, lay claim
to_, LL.

sacc (æ) m. _‘sack,’ bag_, _Æ_. [_L._ saccus]

sācerd mf. _priest, priestess_, Æ, CP. [_L._ sacerdos]

sācerdbana m. _priest-slayer_, W.

sācerdgerīsne _befitting a priest_, BH 206^12.

sācerdhād m. _priesthood_, CP.

sācerdland n. _land allotted to priests_, Æ.

sācerdlic _sacerdotal, priestly_, BH.

sācerhād = sācerdhād

sacful _quarrelsome, contentious_, _Æ_. [‘_sakful_’]

sacian _to wrangle, strive_, Æ.

saclēas _innocent_, _LL_: _unmolested, safe_, _KC, MtL_. [‘_sackless_’]

sacu f. (oblique cases often have sæc-) (±) _conflict, strife, war,
battle, feud, sedition, dispute_, _Æ, B_; AO: _affliction, persecution,
trial_: _sin, fault_, _B, Ph_: _prosecution, lawsuit, action_. s. and
sōcn _jurisdiction, right of holding a court for criminal and civil
matters_, _LL_ (v. 2·455). [‘_sake_’]

sad- v. sæd.

sāda m. _snare, cord, halter_. [cp. _Ger._ saite]

sadel = sadol

±sadelian _to ‘saddle,’_ _Æ, KC_ (‘_saddled_’).

sadian _to be sated, get wearied_, _Bo_: (+) _satiate, fill_, _Ps_.
[‘_sade_’; sæd]

sadol (e^2, u^2) m. _saddle_.

sadolbeorht _with ornamented saddle_, B 2175.

sadolboga m. ‘_saddle-bow_,’ _WW_.

sadolfelg f. _pommel of a saddle_, #Gl#.

Saducēisc _Sadducean_; as sb. m. _Sadducee_.

sadul = sadol

sǣ mf. often indecl. but also gs. sǣs, sǣwe, sēo; nap. sǣs, gp. sǣwa,
dp. sǣwum, sǣ(u)m _sheet of water_, _‘sea,’ lake, pool_, _Æ, B, Bo, G,
Lcd, VPs_.

sǣǣl m. _sea-eel_, WW 447^36.

sǣælfen = sǣelfen

sǣbāt † f. _‘sea-boat,’ vessel, ship_, _B_.

sǣbeorg m. _cliff by the sea_: _mountain of waves_? #An# 308.

sǣburg f. _seaport town_, MtL 4^13.

sæc I. _offensive, odious_: _guilty_. II. (#KGl# 61^22) = sacc

sæc- = sec- (and v. sacu)

sǣc- = sēc-

sæcc I. f. _strife, contest_. [sacan] II. m. _sackcloth_, _Æ_.
[‘_sack_’; = sacc]

sæcce pres. 1 sg. of sācan.  [[headword spelled “sacan”]]

sæccing m. _sacking, pallet_, Mk 6^55.

sæcdōm = sceacdōm

sǣceaster f. _seaport town_, MtR 4^13.

sǣceosol m. _sea-sand, shingle_, Æ.

sæcerd == sacerd  [[headword spelled “sācerd”]]

sæcgen = sægen

sǣcir m. _sea-ebbing_, #Ex# 291.

sǣclian (_Chr_) = sīclian

sǣclif n. _cliff by the sea_, _Bo_. [‘_seacliff_’]

sǣcocc m. _cockle_, WW 94^14.

sǣcol n. _jet_, WW 416^2. [‘_seacoal_’]

sǣcyning m. _sea-king_, B 2382.

sæcysul = sǣceosol

sæd (occl. sad- in obl. cases) w. g. _sated with, weary of, satiated,
filled, fill_, _Ps, Rd_. [‘_sad_’]

sǣd n., nap. sǣd, sǣdu ‘_seed_,’ _Mk_, #VPs# (ē), Æ, CP: _fruit,
offspring, posterity_, _MkL, VPs_: _sowing_, _Met_; Æ: _growth_.

sǣdberende _seed-bearing_, Æ.

sǣdcynn n. _kind of seed_.

sǣde pret. 3 sg. of secgan.

sǣdēor m. _sea-monster_.

sǣdere m. _sower_, _Æ, MkL_. [‘_seeder_’]

sǣdian _to provide seed_, LL 450[10].

sǣdlēap m. _sower’s basket_, _A_. [‘_seedlip_’]

sǣdlic _belonging to seed, seminal_, DR 146^5.

sǣdnað m. _sowing_, WW 147^4.

sædnes f. _satiety_, GPH 391.

sǣdraca m. _sea-dragon_.

sǣdsworn _seed_ (fig. and collectively), REHy 8(9)^55.

sǣdtīma m. _seed-time_, #Hex# 12^28.

sǣearm m. _arm of the sea_, AO 22^4.

sǣelfen (æ^2) f. _sea-elf, Naiad_, WW.

sǣfæreld n. _passage of the (Red) sea_, AO 38^33.

sǣfæsten f. _watery stronghold, ocean_, #Ex# 127.

sǣ-faroð, -fearoð † m. _sea-coast_.

Sæfern f. _Severn_. [_L._ Sabrina]

sǣfisc m. ‘_sea-fish_,’ _Cr_.

sǣflōd mn. _tide, inundation, flood, flow of the sea, flood-tide_, _AO_:
(†)_sea_. [‘_seaflood_’]

sǣflota m. _(sea-floater), ship_, #An# 381.

sǣfōr f. _sea-voyage_, #Seaf# 42.

±sǣgan _to cause to sink, settle_: _cause to fall, fell, destroy_.
[sīgan]

sægd- = sæged-

sægde pret. 3 sg. of secgan.

sægdig (N) = sægde ic  [[form of “secgan”]]

sǣgēap _spacious (ship)_, B 1896.

±sǣgednes f. _sacrifice_, MkLR 12^33; #APs# 65^13: _mystery_, MtL
13^11 (gd-).

sǣgemǣre n. _sea-coast_, G.

±sægen (e) f. _speech, statement_, Æ, AO: _premonition, prophecy_, AO:
_report, story, legend_. sēo hālge +s. _Holy Writ_.

sǣgenga m. † _ship_: _sailor_.

sǣgeset m. _coast region_, #Gl#.

sægl = sigel

sægnian = segnian

sǣgon pret. pl. of sēon.

sǣgrund m. _sea-bottom, abyss_, Æ, CP.

sæh = seah

sǣhealf f. _side next the sea_, #Chr# 1072#e#.

sǣhengest m. _sea-horse, ship_, #An# 488: _hippopotamus_, WW.

sǣhete m. _boiling, surging of the sea_, BH 384^24.

sǣholm m. _ocean_, #An# 529.

sæht = seht

sæhtlian = sahtlian  [[under “sehtlian”]]

sǣhund m. _sea-dog, sea-monster_, OEG 26^61.

sæl n. nap. salu _room, hall, castle_, _B, Rd_. [‘_sale_’; _Ger._ saal]

sǣl (ē) I. mf. (occl. dp. sālum) _time, season, opportunity, occasion,
condition, position_, _Lcd_; Æ, AO: _prosperity, happiness, joy_, _B_.
on sǣlum _happy_; ‘_gaudete_,’ GD 202^6. tō sǣles _in due time_, NR 39.
II. = sēl II.

sǣlāc † n. _sea-gift, sea-spoil_, B.

sǣlād † f. _sea-way, sea-voyage_.

sǣlāf † f. _sea-leavings, jetsam_.

±sǣlan I. (ē) _to take place, happen_. [sǣl I.] II. † _to tie, bind,
fetter, fasten_: _curb, restrain, confine_. [sāl; _Ger._ seil]

sǣland n. _coast, maritime district_, Ct.

sæld = seld

sælen I. _made of willow_, WW 518^6. [sealh] II. = selen

sǣleoda = sǣlida

sǣlēoð n. _song at sea, rowers’ song_, WW 379^9.

-sæleða v. sealt-s.

sǣlic _of the sea, marine_, Æ.

sǣlida m. _seafarer, sailor, mariner_: _pirate_. [līðan]

±sǣlig (+ exc. at LL 300#a#) _happy, prosperous_, _AO, Bo, Gen_.
[‘_i-seli_’]

+sǣlige _happily_, WW 407^23.

+sǣliglic _happy, blessed, fortunate_. adv. -līce, _Bo_. [‘_sellily_’]

+sǣlignes f. _happiness_.

sǣ-līðend, -līðende † m. _sailor_.

+sǣllic = +sǣliglic

sælmerige f. _brine_, Æ. [_L._ *salmoria; _Gk._ ἁλμυρίς]

+sæltan (NG) = sealtan

sæltna m. _name of a bird, bunting_? _robin_? WW 44^17.

sælð f. _dwelling, house_, #Gen# 785.

±sǣlð (ȳ) f. (usu. in pl.) _happiness, prosperity, blessing_, _Bo_; Æ,
CP. [‘_i-selth_’]

sǣlwang (o^2) † m. _fertile plain_.

sǣm v. sǣ.

sǣma = sēma

+sǣman = +sȳman, sīeman

sǣmann m. _‘seaman,’ pirate, viking_, _B_.

sǣmearh † m. _sea-horse, ship_.

sǣmend = sēmend

sǣmest superl. (of *sǣme?) _worst_.

sǣmestre = sēamestre

sǣmēðe _weary from a sea-voyage_, B 325.

sǣminte f. _sea-mint_, WW.

sæmninga = samnunga

sǣmra comp. (of *sǣme?) _worse, inferior, weaker_.

sæmtinges = samtinges

sǣn _maritime_, OEG 6^23.

sǣnaca m. _sea-vessel, ship_, #Hu# 26.

sǣnæs m. _cape, promontory, maze_.

sæncgan = sengan

sændan = sendan

sǣne (often w. g.) _slack, lazy, careless, negligent, dull, cowardly_.

sǣnet n. _net for sea-fishing_, WW 336^20.

sængan = sengan

sǣnian = sēnian

sæp (e) n. _‘sap,’ juice_, _Cr, WW_.

sǣp (ÆL 3^162) = sēap

sæpig _‘sappy,’ juicy, succulent_, OEG 16^1.

sæppe f. _spruce fir_, WW 269^14. [_L._ *sappinum; _Fr._ sapin]

sæpspōn f. _a shaving with sap in it_, #Lcd# 106b.

sǣre = sāre

sǣrima m. _sea-border, sea-shore, coast_, _Chr_. [‘_searim_’]

sǣrinc † m. _seaman, pirate, viking_.

sǣrōf _hardy at sea_, #Cra# 56.

særwian = searwian

sǣrȳric m. _sea-reed_? (GK); _an ait_? (BT), #Whale# 10.

sæs = sess

sǣs v. sǣ.

sǣsceaða m. _pirate_, WW 469^6.

sǣscell f. ‘_sea-shell_,’ _MH_ 18^23.

sǣsīð m. _sea-voyage_, B 1149.

sǣ-snægl, -snǣl m. ‘_sea-snail_,’ _WW_.

sǣsteorra m. _guiding star (for sailors)_, _HL_. [‘_seastar_’]

sæster = sester

sǣstrand m. _‘sea-strand,’ foreshore_, _Æ_.

sǣstrēam, as mpl. _waters of the sea_, _An_. [‘_seastream_’]

sǣswalwe (hǣ-) f. _sand-martin_, WW 7^28.

sæt pret. 3 sg. of sittan.

sǣt f. _lurking-place_: _snare, gin_? LL 445[2]. [sittan]

+sæt n. _act of sitting_, MkL p5^14.

sǣta m? _holding of land_, EC 447^18.

-sǣta (ē) v. burg-s.

sǣtan = sǣtian

-sǣte v. an(d)-s.

sæterdæg = sætern(es)dæg

sǣt-ere, -nere (ē) m. _waylayer, robber_: _spy_: _seditious one, seducer
(the Devil)_, CP.

sætern-dæg, sæter(n)es- m. ‘_Saturday_,’ _BH, Bl, Lk_. [_L._ Saturni
dies]

sæterniht f. _Friday night_, Æ.

sǣtian (ē) (w. g.) _to lie in wait for, plot against_, CP. [sittan]

sætil, sætl == setl

sǣtn- = sǣt-

+sætnes = +setnes

sǣton pret. pl. of sittan.

sǣtung (ē) f. _ambush, trap, plot, snare_, CP: _sedition_.

sǣð (ÆL 36^295) = sēað

sǣðēof v. hēahsǣðēof.

sæðerie f. _savory (plant)_. [_L._ satureia]

sǣðrenewudu = sūðernewudu

sǣum v. sǣ.

sǣūpwearp _jetsam_, TC 421^32.

sǣwǣg m. _sea-wave_, #Da# 384.

sǣwæter n. ‘_sea-water_,’ _Lcd_ 10b.

sǣwan = sāwan

sǣwār n. _sea-weed_, _WW_ 135^21. [‘_seaware_’]

sǣwaroð n. _sea-shore, beach_.

sǣwe v. sǣ.

sǣweall † m. _‘sea-wall,’ seashore, beach, cliff_, _B_: _wall of water
(in the Red Sea)_.

sǣweard m. _coast warden_, LL.

sǣweg m. _path through the sea_, _Ps_ 8^8. [‘_seaway_’]

sǣwērig † _weary from a sea-voyage_, _An_. [‘_seaweary_’]

sǣwet n. _sowing_. [sāwan]

sǣwīcing m. _sea-viking_, #Ex# 333.

sǣwiht f. _marine animal_, BH 26^6.

sǣwong m. _sea-shore, beach_, B 1964.

sǣwð pres. 3 sg. of sāwan.

sǣwudu m. _vessel, ship_, B 226.

sǣwum v. sǣ.

sǣwylm m. _sea-surf, billow_, B 393.

sæx (#Gl#) = seax

sǣȳð f. _sea-wave_.

safene, safine f. _savine (a kind of juniper)_. [_L._ sabina]

saftriende ptc. _rheumatic_, WW 161^34.

sāg pret. 3 sg. of sīgan.

saga I. imperat. of secgan. II. m., +saga n. = sagu II.

+saga n. _narrative_, LkL 1^1.

sagast pres. 2 sg., sagað pres. 3 sg., sagode pret. 3 sg. of secgan.

sāg-ol, -el m. (sāgl- in obl. cases) _club, cudgel, stick, staff, pole_,
_AO, GD, Mt_; Æ, CP. [‘_sowel_’]

-sagol v. lēas-, sōð-, wær-s.

sagu (±) I. f. _‘saw,’ saying, report, story, tradition, tale_, _Lk,
WW_; Æ: _presage, prophecy_: _witness, testimony_. [secgan] II. f.
_‘saw’ (tool)_, _A, WW_.

sāh I. pret. 3 sg. of sīgan. II. pret. 3 sg. of sēon II.

sahl- = sealh-

sāhl = sāgol

saht == seht

sāl mf. _bond, rope, cord, rein, collar_, _B, Gen_. [‘_sole_’; _Ger._
seil]

sala m. _act of selling, ‘sale,’_ _WW_.

salb = sealf

salch = sealh

salde = sealde pret. 3 sg. of sellan.

salf (Cp) = sealf

salfie, salfige f. _sage_, #Lcd#. [_L._ salvia]

salh (_Gl_), salig = sealh

salletan _to sing psalms, play on, or sing to, the harp_. [_L._
psallere]

salm- = sealm-

sālnes f. _silence_, A 8·319^29. [cp. _Goth._ silan]

salo == salu

salor = solor

salowigpād = saluwigpād

salt == sealt

saltere (ea) m. _‘psalter,’ collection of psalms, service book
containing the psalms_, _BH, Ct_; Æ: _psaltery_, _Lcd_ (ps-). [_L._
psalterium]

salthaga m. _robin redbreast_? WW 286^11.

salu I. (ea) _dark, dusky_, _Rd_. [‘_sallow_’] II. nap. of sæl.

salubrūn (ea^1, o^2) _dark brown_, #Fin# 37.

sālum v. sǣl.

saluneb _dark-complexioned_, #Rd# 50^5.

salupād _dark-coated_, #Rd# 58^3.

saluwigpād = salwigpād

salwed ptc. _darkened, painted black (with pitch)_, #Gen# 1481.

salwigfeðera ‡ _having dark plumage_.

salwigpād † _having dark plumage_.

sālwong = sǣlwang

sam conj. _whether, or_. sam...sam _whether...or_, AO. sam ge...sam ge;
sam ðe...sam ðe _whether...or_.

sam- (= _together_) denotes union, combination, or agreement. [_ON._
sam-]

sām- (= _half-_) denotes a partial or imperfect condition. [_L._ semi-]

sama = same v. swā.

samad- = samod-

sāmbærned _half-burnt_, OEG.

sāmboren _born out of due time_, WW 356^2.

sāmbryce m. _partial breach (of rules, laws, etc.)_, LL 468[9].

sām-cwic, -cucu (o^1) _half-dead_, Æ, AO.

same only in swā s. (swā) _in like manner, also, as_.

samed == samod

samen adv. _together_, JnR (o^1).

sāmgrēne _half-green, immature_, WW 405^4.

sāmgung _young_, CM 123. [geong]

sāmhāl _unwell, weakly_, W 273^10.

samheort _unanimous_, #PPs# 149^1.

±samhīwan pl. _members of the same household_, CP.

samhwyle pron. _some_.

sāmlǣred _half-taught, badly instructed_, Æ.

samlīce _together, at the same time_.

samlinga = samnunga

sāmlocen _half-closed_, NC 318.

sammǣle _agreed, accordant, united_.

sāmmelt _half-digested_, #Lcd# 69b.

±samnian _to assemble, meet, collect, unite, join, gather together_,
(tr.) _Da, Lcd_; (intr.) _Ps_: _glean_. [‘_sam_’]

samninga = samnunga

±samnung (o) f. (but occl. gs. samnunges) _assembly, council_, _MkL_; Æ,
CP. [‘samening’]

samnunga (æ, e, o) adv. _forthwith, immediately, suddenly_. [= semninga]

samnungewide (o^1) _collect_, DR 2^1.

samod (o^1) I. adv. _simultaneously, at the same time, together_, Æ, AO:
_entirely_, Æ: _also, as well, too_. II. prep. (w. d.) _together with,
at_ (of time), Æ. [_Ger._ sammt]

samodberan^4 _to bear together_.

samodcumend _flocking together_, CM 282.

samodeard (o^1, u^2) ‡ m. _common home_.

samodfæst _joined together_, #Cr# 1581.

samodgang? m. _communication between rooms_, GD 170^23. (v. NC 318.)

samodgeflit (o) n. _strife_, WW 382^38.

samodgesīð m. _comrade_, GPH 400.

samodherian (o^1) _to praise together_, #RPs# 116^1.

samodhering f. _praising_, ES 40·302.

+samodlǣcan _to bring together_, #RPs# 112^8.

samodlīce adv. _together_, #Chr# 1123.

samodrynelas mpl. ‘_concurrentes_,’ A 8·302.

samodsprǣc f. _colloquy, conversation_, CM 511.

samodswēgende _consonantal_, #ÆGr# 5^17.

samodtang _continuous, successive_, v. NC 318.

samodðyrlic (o) adj. _concordant_, WW 378^40.

samodwellung (o^1) f. _welding together_, WW 380^44. [weallan]

samodwist f. _a being one with_, GD 224^4.

samodwunung f. _common residence, living together_, LL (422^29).

samodwyrcende ptc. _co-operating_, WW 384^12.

sāmra = sǣmra

samrād _harmonious, united_, #Met# 11^96.

sāmsoden _half-cooked_, LL (166^2n).

sāmstorfen _half-dead_, GPH 401.

sāmswǣled _half burnt_, OEG 4388.

samswēge (u^1) adj. _sounding together, in unison_.

samtinges (æ^1, e^1, e^2) adv. _all at once, immediately, forthwith_, Æ.

samðe conj. in phrase samðe...samðe... _as well...as..._
(‘_tam_’...‘_quam_’...), CM 140, etc. [sam]

sāmweaxen _half-dead_, NC 319.

samwinnende ptc. _contending together_, WW 211^7.

sāmwīs _stupid, dull, foolish_, CP. adv. -līce.

samwist f. _living together, cohabitation_.

sāmworht _unfinished_, #Chr#.

samwrǣdnes f. _union, combination_. #Bo# 114^4.

sāmwyrcan _to half do a thing, do it imperfectly_, LL 350[61,1].

sanc I. pret. 3 sg. of sincan. II. = sang

sanct m. _holy person, saint_, Æ. [_L._ sanctus]

sand (o) I. f. _action of sending, embassy, mission, deputation_, Æ:
_message_: (also m.) _messenger, ambassador_: _sending, service, course
of food, repast, mess, victuals_, _Ep_; Æ. [_‘sand_’; sendan] II. n.
‘_sand,’ gravel_, _Æ, VPs_; AO; Mdf: _sandy shore, sea-shore, beach_.

sandbeorg m. _sand-hill, sand-bank_.

sandceosol m. _sand, gravel_, Æ.

sandcorn n. _grain of sand_, Æ.

sandgeweorp (u^3) n. _sand-bank, quicksand_.

sandgewyrpe n. _sand-heap_, KC 6·228^23.

sandgrot n. _grain of sand_, #Hell# 117.

sand-hlið n., nap. -hleoðu _sandy slope, hillock_, #An# 236.

sandhof ‡ n. _sand-house, barrow, grave_.

sandhricg m. _sand-bank_, #ÆGr# 75^8.

sandhyll m. ‘_sand-hill_,’ _Cp_ (o).

sandig ‘_sandy_,’ _Lcd_.

sandiht (o) _sandy, dusty_, AO.

sandlond † (o) n. _sandy shore_.

sandrid n. _quicksand_, WW 183^7.

sang I. m. _noise_, _‘song,’ singing_, _B, Bo, Cr, LkL_: _psalm, poem,
lay_, _Bl, CP, VPs_ (o). II. pret. 3 sg. of singan.

sangbōc f. _singing-book, service-book_, _KC, LL_. [‘_songbook_’]

sangcræft m. _art of singing, composing poetry, or playing an
instrument_.

sangdrēam m. _‘cantilena,’ song, music_, CM 638.

sangere (o) m. _singer, poet_, _BH, Bl_. [‘_songer_’]

sangestre f. _songstress_, _ÆGr_. [‘_songster_’]

sangpīpe f. _pipe_, GPH 389^26.

-sānian v. ā-s. [sǣne]

sann pret. 3 sg. of sinnan.

sāp f? _amber, unguent_, #Gl#.

sāpbox m. _box for resin_? _soap-box_? LL 455[17].

sāpe f. _‘soap,’ salve_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ.

sār I. n. _bodily pain, sickness_, _BH, Bl, Cr, VPs_: _wound_, _‘sore,’
raw place_, _Gu, Lcd_: _suffering, sorrow, affliction_, _Bo, Chr_. II.
adj. _sore, sad, grievous, painful, wounding_, _CP, Cr, Gen, Lcd,
LL, Rd_.

sārbenn † f. _painful sore or wound_.

sārbōt f. _compensation for wounding_, LL 500[10,1].

sārclāð m. _bandage_, WW.

sārcren _sore, tender_, #Lcd# 65b.

sārcwide † m. _taunt, reproach_: _lament_.

sāre (ǣ) adv. _sorely, heavily, grievously, bitterly_, _B, Cr, Gen, Ps_:
_painfully_, _B_. [‘_sore_’]

sārettan _to grieve, be vexed, lament, complain_, CP.

sārferhð _sorrowful_, #Gen# 2244.

sarga m. _trumpet, clarion_, #Gl#.

sārgian (±) _to cause pain, afflict, wound, grieve_: _be pained, suffer,
languish_, CP. [sārig]

sārgung f. _lamentation, grief_.

sārian _to become painful_, CP: _grieve, be sad, feel sorry for_, BH.

sārig _‘sorry,’ grieved, sorrowful, sad_, _Æ, Bo, Cr, Ps_.

sārigcierm (e^3) m. _wailing_, MFH 128^8.

sārigferhð † _sad-hearted_.

sārigmōd _dejected, mournful_, _B_. [‘_sorry-mood_’]

sārignes f. _sadness, grief_, _Æ, Chr_. [‘_sorriness_’]

sārlic _grievous, sad, doleful, painful, lamentable, bitter_, _Æ, B, Bo,
Bl_. adv. -līce _‘sorely,’ grievously, mournfully, bitterly, painfully_,
_Æ, Bl, Bo, Jul_; CP.

sārnes f. _affliction, distress, suffering, pain, grief_, _Æ_.
[‘_soreness_’]

sārseofung f. _complaint_, WW 488^36.

sārslege † m. _painful blow_.

sārspell n. _sad story, complaint_.

sārstæf ‡ m. _cutting word, abuse, insult_.

sārung = sārgung

sarw- = searw-

sār-wracu † f., gds. -wræce _grievous persecution, sore tribulation_.

sārwylm m. _pain, illness_, #Gu# 1123.

saturege f. _savory (plant)_, _Lcd_ 147a. [‘_satureie_’]

sāul = sāwol

±sāwan^7 _to ‘sow,’ strew seed, implant_, _Æ, Bo, Lcd, G, VPs_:
_disseminate_, _Bo, CP_.

sāwel == sāwol

+sāweled _having a soul_, G.

sāwend, sāwere (_Mt_) m. ‘_sower_.’

sāwl (CP) == sāwol

sāwlian _to expire_, Æ.

sāwlung (e^2) f. _dying_, _Shr_. [‘_souling_’]

sā-wol (-wel, -wul, -wl) f., gs, sāwle _‘soul,’ life_, _Æ, B, Bl, Bo,
VPs_; CP: _spirit_, _Bl, Chr_: _living being_, _Æ_.

sāwolberend m. _human being_, B 1004 (wl).

sāwolcund (e) _spiritual_, #Gu# 288.

sawoldrēor † n. _life-blood_.

sāwolgedāl † n. _death_.

sāwolgesceot = sāwolscot  [[under “sāwolsceat”]]

sāwolhord (e^2, wl) † n. _life, body_.

sāwolhūs † n. _(soul house), body_.

sāwollēas _soulless, lifeless_, Æ.

sāwol-sceat (e^2), -scot m. _payment to the church on the death of a
person_, LL.

sāwolðearf f. _soul’s need_, TC 474 (wl).

sāwon pret. pl. of sēon.

sāwul == sāwol

sca-, scā-, v. also scea-, scēa-.

scābfot = scāffōt

scād = +scēad I.

scāda m. _crown of head_, #PPs# 67^21. [‘_shode_’]

scādesealf (ēa) f. _salve or powder_ (_for the head_?), #Lcd#.

+scādwyrt f. _oxeye_, #Lcd# 103a.

scæ- = scea-

scǣ- = scēa-

scæc, scec _‘boja,’ fetters_, #JGPh# 1·329. [_Du._ schake]

scæcen pp. of sceacan.

scæd = (1) scead; (2) sceabb

scæftamund = sceaftmund

scæfð = sceafoða

scægð = scegð

scæm- = scam-

scǣnan I. (±) (ē, ēa) _to break, wrench open_, _Æ_. [‘_shene_’] II. (+)
_to render brilliant_? #Sol# 222 (GK).

scænc = scenc

scændan = sciendan

+scǣningnes f. _collision_, WW 384^10.

scǣp == scēap

scæptlō (Cp) = sceaftlō

scær = scear I. and II.

scǣron pret. pl. of scieran.

scǣð I. (_Gen_) = scēað. II. = scegð

scæð- = sceð-, sceað-

scafa m. _plane_, _Ep, LL_. [‘_shave_’]

±scafan^6 (a, æ, ea) _to ‘shave,’ scrape, polish_, _Cp, BH_.

scāffōt _splay-footed_, #Gl#.

scalde = sceolde pret. 3 sg. of sculan.

scaldhūl _papyrus-plant_, Cp 1491 (v. ES 43·320).

scaldðȳfel = scealdðȳfel

scalu = scealu

scamel = scamol

scamfæst _‘shamefast,’ modest_, _CP_.

scamful (eo) _modest_, _DR_. [‘_shameful_’]

scamian (ea, eo, o) (w. g.) _to be ashamed, blush_, _B, CP_: (impers.,
w. a. of pers. and g. of thing) _cause shame_, _Æ_ (ea), _CP_.
[‘_shame_’]

scamisc _causing shame_, WW 532^31.

scamlēas _‘shameless,’ impudent, immodest_, _CP_.

scamlēaslic _shameless_, CP. adv. -līce ‘_shamelessly_,’ _CP_.

scamlēast (ea^1) f. _impudence, shamelessness, immodesty_.

scamlic (æ, ea) _shameful, disgraceful_, _OEG_; AO: _modest_.
[‘_shamely_’] adv. -līce, CP.

scamlim n. _private member_, GPH 390.

scamol (æ^1, e^1, ea^1, eo^1, o^1; e^2, o^2) m. _stool, footstool,
bench, table (of money-changers)_, _Bl_ (eo), _VPs_ (o). [‘_shamble_’]

scamu (ea, eo, o) f. _‘shame,’ confusion_, _Cp_ (o), _Lk_ (eo):
_disgrace, dishonour_, _Cr_ (o): _insult_, MkR (o): _shameful
circumstance_, WW: _modesty_, CP: _private parts_, _Gen, WW_. s. dōn _to
inflict injury_.

scamul = scamol

scamung (ea) f. _disgrace_, #LPs# 68^20.

scān pret. 3 sg. of scīnan.

scanca m. _‘shank,’ shin, leg_, _Ph, WW_: _ham_? _LL_ (sconc).

scancbend (scang-) m. _leg-band, garter_, WW 152^39.

scancforad _broken-legged_, CP.

scancgebeorg f. _leg-greave_, WW 535^9.

scancgegirela m. _leg-clothing, leg-band, anklet, garter_, WW 467^29.

scanclīra m. _calf of the leg_, WW 266^4.

scand I. (ea, eo, o) f. _ignominy, shame, confusion, disgrace_, _Chr,
Cr_: _scandal, disgraceful thing_, _CP_. II. m. _wretch, impostor,
recreant, buffoon_, _Æ_. III. f. _bad woman_. [‘_shond_’]

scandful _shameful, disgraceful_, _MH_. [‘_shondfull_’]

scandhūs m. _house of ill fame_, MH 26^24.

scandlic (ea, o) _shameful, disgraceful, vile, unchaste_, _Bo_; Æ, AO
(o). [‘_shondly_’] adv. -līce _shamefully, obscenely_: _insultingly_.

scandlicnes f. _shame, disgrace_, CP (o): _disgraceful act_.

scandlufiende _loving shamefully_, ZDA 31·25.

+scandnes (e, y) f. _shame, confusion_, _Æ, Ps_. [‘_shendness_’]

scandword (ea) n. _abusive, blasphemous or obscene language_, W 255^15.

scang- = scanc-

+scāp- = +scēap-

+scapen pp. of scieppan.

scar- = scear-

scað- = sceað-

scēab (_Cp_) = scēaf

sceaba = scafa

sceabb m. ‘_scab_,’ _CP_. [‘_shab_’]

sceabbede _purulent, having sores or scabs_, _OEG_. [‘_shabbed_’]

sceacan^6 (tr. and intr.) _to ‘shake,’ move quickly to and fro_, _MtL_:
_go, glide, hasten, flee, depart_, _B_; Æ: _pass from, proceed_, CP.

sceacdōm (æ) m. _flight_, Æ.

sceacel (e) m. ‘_shackle_,’ _WW_: _plectrum_.

scēacere m. _robber_, NG. [_Ger._ schächer]

sceacga m. _rough hair, wool, etc._, _WW_. [‘_shag_’]

sceacgede _hairy, shaggy_, WW.

sceaclīne (WW 182^26) = sceatlīne

sceacnes f. ‘_excussio_,’ #EPs# 140^4.

sceacul = sceacel

scead (a, æ, e) n. _shadow, shade_: _shelter, protection_: _stye_, Cp
1954 (ES 43·326).

+scēad (ā) n. _separation, distinction_, _LkL_: _discretion,
understanding, argument_, _Æ_; CP: _reason_, ÆP 142^11: _reckoning,
account_, _Mt_: _accuracy_. [‘_shed_’]

±scēadan^7 (ā, ē) (tr. and intr.) _to divide, separate, part_, _Soul_;
#Lcd# (ā): _discriminate, decide, determine, appoint_: _differ_:
_scatter, ‘shed,’_ _Lcd_.

sceadd m. _‘shad’ (fish)_, _KC_ 6·147.

scēadelīce = scēadlīce

+scēaden _rational_, Æ.

scēadenmǣl n. _damascened sword_? B 1939?

scēadesealf = scādesealf

sceadew- = sceadw-

sceadiht _shady_, CVHy 5^3.

sceadlic _shady_, OEG 2885.

+scēadlic _reasonable, discreet, wise, accurate_, CP. adv. -līce.

+scēadnes? ‘_auctoritas_,’ NC.

sceadu (a) f., gs. scead(u)we, sceade _‘shade,’ shadow, darkness_, _Ex,
Ps, Sol_; CP: _shady place, arbour_, _Lcd_: _shelter_.

sceadugeard m. _shady place_, Cp 79#t#.

sceadugenga m. _wanderer in darkness_, B 703.

sceaduhelm (a^1) m. _darkness_, B 650.

sceadwian (a^1) _to protect, shield_, _Ps_ 90^4. [‘_shadow_’]

sceadwig _shady_, RHy 5^3.

±scēad-wīs (a), -wīslic _sagacious, intelligent, rational, wise_, Æ.
adv. -līce.

scēadwīsnes f. _sagacity, reason_.

sceadwung f. _overshadowing_, Æ.

scēaf I. m. _‘sheaf,’ bundle_, _Æ, Lcd_; CP. II. pret. 3 sg. of scūfan.

sceafan = scafan

scēafmǣlum adv. _into bundles_, Mt 13^30.

sceafoða m. _chip, shaving, slip, scraping_.

sceaft (æ, e) m. _staff, pole, ‘shaft,’_ _Met, WW_: _spear-shaft,
spear_, _Æ_; CP.

±sceaft fn., nap. -tu, -ta, -te _created being, creature_, Æ, CP:
_creation, construction, existence_, Æ, CP: (+) _dispensation, destiny,
fate_, CP: (+) _condition, nature_. [scieppan]

sceaft-lō, pl. -lōn _spear-strap_, Cp (sce(a)pt-).

sceaftmund (æ) f. _span_, _LL_. [‘_shaftment_’]

sceaftrihte adv. _in a straight line_, CC 54.

sceafð = sceafoða

sceaga (a) m. _copse_, _Ct_; Mdf. [‘_shaw_’]

sceagod = sceacgede

sceal pres. 1 and 3 sg. of sculan.

scealc m. _servant, retainer, soldier, subject, member of a crew_, _Ps_:
_man, youth_, _B_. [‘_shalk_’]

sceald _shallow_, PST 1895-8, 532.

scealde = sceolde pret. 2 sg. of sculan.

scealdðȳfel m. _‘alga,’ seaweed, marsh plant, shrub_, GD 100; 212 (v. ES
38·355; 43·318).

scealfor f., scealfra (Æ) m. _plungeon, diver (bird)_. [cp. _OHG._
scarbo]

scealga (y) m. _a fish, roach_? _rudd_? _WW_. [‘_shallow_’]

-scealian v. ā-s.

sceall = sceal pres. 1 and 3 sg. of sculan.

sceallan pl. ‘_testiculi_,’ #Lcd#.

scealtu = scealt ðu (pres. 2 sg. of sculan, and pron. 2 pers.).

scealu (a) f. _shell, husk_, _Ep_ (a): _scale (of a balance)_, Æ:
_dish_, _KC_. [‘_shale_’]

scēam m. _pale grey or white horse_? #Rd# 23^4. [_Ger._ schimmel]

sceam- = scam-

scēan pret. 3 sg. of scīnan.

scēanan = scǣnan

sceanc- = scanc-

sceand == scand

scēanfeld = scīnfeld

scēap (ǣ, ē, ī) n. ‘_sheep_,’ _CP, WW_.

+sceap (a) n., nap. -pu _‘shape,’ form, created being, creature_, _El,
Gen, WW_: _creation_: _dispensation, fate_: _condition_: (±)
‘_genitalia_,’ _A_.

-sceap v. for-s.

scēapætere (ǣ^1, ī^1; e^2) m. _sheep’s carcase_, LL 449[8].

sceapen pp. of scieppan.

scēapen adj. _of a sheep_, #Lcd#.

+sceapennes f. _creation, formation_, Æ.

scēaphām m. _sheepfold_, EC 373.

scēapheord f. _flock of sheep_, Æ.

scēapheorden n. _shed_, WW 185^15.

+sceaphwīl (æ) f. _fated hour_, B 26.

scēaphyrde (_W_; Æ) (i) m. ‘_shepherd_.’

scēaplic _of a sheep_, OEG 11^187.

+sceaplīce _ably, fitly_, BH 324^4 (ca).

scēapscearu (ē) f. _sheep-shearing_, Æ.

-sceapung v. for-s.

scēapwæsce f. _place for washing sheep_, Ct.

scēapwīc n. _sheepfold_, KC 3·405^5.

scear I. (æ, e) mn. _ploughshare_, _Cp_ (æ), _Sc_ (e). [‘_share_’] II.
pret. 3 sg. of scieran.

scēara = scēarra

scearbēam m. _wood to which the ploughshare is fixed_, WW 196^28.

sceard I. n. _incision, cleft, gap_, _Ct_: _potsherd_, _GPH_.
[‘_shard_’] II. adj. _cut, mutilated, gashed, notched, hacked_: (w. g.)
_bereft of, deprived of_.

±scearfian _to cut off, scrape, shred_.

scearflian _to scrape_, #Lcd# 1·184^18.

scearfung f. _scraping, scarifying_, #Lcd#.

scearn (æ, e) n. _dung, muck_, _Lcd, VPs_. [‘_sharn_’]

scearnbudda m. _dung-beetle_, #ÆGr# 308^1n.

scearn-wibba (æ, e) -wifel (-fifel, WW) m. _dung-beetle_.

scēaron = scǣron pret. pl. of scieran.

scearp (a, æ) _‘sharp,’ pointed, prickly_, _Lcd, Soul, VPs_: _acute,
keen, active, shrewd_, _Bo, Lcd_: _severe, rough, harsh_, _AO, Lcd_:
_biting, bitter, acid_, _Lcd_: _brave_. [scieran]

scearpe I. adv. _‘sharply,’ keenly_, _Hex, Ps_; Æ. II. f.
_scarification_, #Lcd#.

scearpecged ‘_sharp-edged_,’ _Æ_.

scearpian _to score, scarify_, #Lcd#.

scearplic _sharp, severe, effectual_. adv. -līce _‘sharply,’ acutely,
keenly_, _CP_: _painfully, severely_, _OET, W_: _effectually_, CM 192:
_attentively_, _A_: _quickly_, _WW_.

scearpnes f. _‘sharpness,’ acuteness, keen observation_, _Bo, Cp, CP_;
Æ: _tartness, pungency, acidity_, _Lcd, W_; Æ: _efficacy_.

scearpnumol _effective_, #Lcd#.

scearpsīene _keen-sighted_, #Bo#.

scearpsmēawung f. _argument_, G.

scearpðanc(ful)līce adv. _efficaciously_.

scearpðancol _quick-witted, keen_, #Lcd# 3·440^28.

scearpung f. _scarifying_, #Lcd#.

scēarra fpl. _shears, scissors_, _A, CP, WW_. [‘_shear_’]

scearseax (e, i, ie, y) n. _razor_, CP.

scearu I. (a, æ, y) f. _shearing, shaving, tonsure_, Æ. II. (a) f.
_‘share’-bone, groin_, _Lcd, WW_ (a).

scēat I. m. _corner angle, edge, point, promontory_, Mdf: _quarter,
district, region, surface (of the earth)_: _lap, bosom, fold_, CP:
_napkin, sheet, covering, cloak, garment_, CP: _inlet, creek_, BH 90^27.
[_Ger._ schoss] II. pret. 3 sg. of scēotan.

scēata m. _angle, corner_, AO: _bosom, lap, lower part of a sail_:
_napkin_. [_Ger._ schote]

scēatcod m. _wallet_, WW 107^5. [codd]

sceatlīne f. _sheet by which a sail is trimmed to the wind_, WW 288^24.

sceatt (æ, e) m. _property, treasure, coin, money, wealth_, _LL_:
_payment, price, tribute, bribe, reward_, Æ: _money of account,
denarius, twentieth part of a shilling_ (Kent), v. LL 2·634. [‘_sceat_’]

sceatwyrpan _to make the payment to the bridegroom on which the bride
passes into his power from that of the father_, WW 386^1 (v. ES 42·170).

scēað (ǣ, ē) f. ‘_sheath_,’ _Æ, JnL_ (ēæ): _spike, nail_, JnL 20^23?
[cp. hornscēað]

sceaða (a) m. _injurious person, criminal, thief, assassin_, _B, Mt_; Æ:
(†) _warrior, antagonist_: _fiend, devil_: _injury_, _Gen_ 549.
[‘_scathe_’]

sceaðan = sceððan

sceaðel f. _shuttle_? _weaver’s slay_? LL 455, 15, 1 (v. ANS 115^165).

sceaðenes = sceðnes

sceaðful _hurtful_, _GD_ 209. [‘_scatheful_’]

sceaðian _to injure, spoil, steal_.

sceaðig (æ) _injurious_, #ÆGr# 63^15.

sceaðung f. _injury, damage_, TC 138^18.

scēawendsprǣc f. _scurrility, buffoonery_, WW 533^4.

scēawendwīse f. _buffoon’s song_, #Rd# 9^9.

scēawere m. _beholder, spectator, observer, spy_, _B_; Æ, CP: _mirror_.
[‘_shower_’]

±scēawian _to look, gaze, see, behold, observe_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP:
_inspect, examine, scrutinize_, _Chr, Lk_; Æ, AO: _have respect to, look
favourably on_, Æ: _look out, look for, choose_, Æ: _decree, grant_.
[‘_show_’]

scēawung (a) f. _seeing, surveying, inspection, scrutiny, examination,
contemplation_, AO, CP: _respect, regard_: _show, spectacle,
appearance_, _Bl, MkL_: _toll on exposure of goods_. [‘_showing_’]

sceb = sceabb

scēb = scēaf

scec = scæc

scecel = sceacel

sced = scead

scēd pret. 3 sg. of scēadan.

scef- = sceaf-, scyf-

scegð (æ, ei) mf. _vessel, ship_. [_ON._ skeið]

scegðmann (æ) m. _sailor, pirate, viking_, Æ.

scehð = scegð

sceið = scegð

scel = (1) sceal; (2) sciell

sceld = (1) scield; (2) scyld I.

sceld- = scild-, scyld-

scelēge (#Gl#) = sceolhēge

scelfan^3 (= ie) _to totter, shake_. [_ON._ skialfa]

scelfor = scealfor

scell I. = sceal. II. = sciell

scelle (= ie) _separation_? _cutting off_? Cp 777#c# (v. FM 100).

scemel = scamol

scēnan = scǣnan

scenc (æ) m. (±) _drink, draught_, _Lcd, MtL_: _cup_, CM 959.
[‘_shench_’]

±scencan _to pour out, give drink_, _B, LPs_ (æ), _Sc_; Æ, CP.
[‘_shench_’; _Ger._ schenken]

scencingcuppe f. _jug_, TC 536^7.

scendan I. (±, i, ie, y) _to put to shame, confound, discomfort_, _AO,
VPs_: _blame_, _CP_ (ie): _corrupt, injure_, _Cr, DR_: _disgrace,
insult_. [‘_shend_’] II. = scyndan I.

scendle f. _reproach_, LkLR 11^8.

+scendnes = +scandnes

scendung f. _reproach, affliction_, N.

scēne = scīene

scēnfeld = scīnfeld

scennum dp. of sb. _pommel of sword-hilt_? _plate of metal on pommel_? B
1694.

+scento, +scendðo (#VPs#) f. _shame, confusion_.

scēo I. _cloud_? #Rd# 4^41. II. = scēoh, scōh

sceo- = sco-, scu-

scēo- = scō-, scū-

scēoc pret. 3 sg. of sceacan.

sceocc- = scucc-

scēod I. = scōd pret. 3 sg of sceððan. II. pp. of scōgan.

scēofan = scūfan

scēogan (CP) = scōgan

scēoh I. _‘shy,’ timid_, _Rim_ 43. II. = scōh

scēohmōd _timid_, #Jul# 672.

sceol (*sceolh) _squinting, awry_, WW. [_Ger._ scheel]

sceolan = sculan

sceoldan = scieldan

sceolh-ēge, -ē(a)gede (y) _squinting_, Æ.

sceolu = scolu

sceom- = scam-

scēon (±) I. † _to fall (to)_, _occur, happen_: _go quickly, fly_. II. =
scōgan

scēon- = scīen-

scēona gp. of scēoh.

sceonc- = scanc-

sceond = scand

sceop = scop

scēop pret. 3 sg. of scieppan.

sceoppa m. _booth_, _Lk_ 21^1. [‘_shop_’]

sceoppend = scieppend

sceopu nap. of scip.

scēor = scūr

sceoran = scieran

sceorf = scurf

sceorfan^3 _to scarify, gnaw_, AO: (+) _scrape, shred_.

sceorian = scorian

sceorp (o) n. _ornament, clothing_, AO: _equipment, fittings_ (_for a
ship_?), LL 444[1].

±sceorpan^3 _to scrape, gnaw_, #Lcd#.

sceort == scort

scēos gs., nap. of scēoh, scōh.

sceot == scot

±scēot _ready, quick_.

sceota m. _‘shoat,’ trout_, _WW_ 94.

±scēotan^2 _to ‘shoot,’ hurl missiles, cast_, _Bl, Ma, ZDA_; Æ: _strike,
hit, push, thrust_, _AO, Lcd, Ma_: _run, rush, dart, press forward_, _Æ,
Jn_: _contribute, pay_: _refer to, appeal to_, _Æ, TC_.

scēotend † m. _bowman, warrior_.

sceoton = scuton pret. pl. of scēotan.

sceoða = sceaða

scēo-ðwang, -ðong m. _‘shoe-thong,’ boot-lace_, _Jn_.

scēowyrhta m. _shoemaker, leather-worker_, GD 322^1 (scōh-); WW 97^5.

scep = scyp I.

scep- = sciep-

+scep = +sceap

scēp (_VPs_) = scēap

scepen I. pp. of scieppan. II. = scypen. III. (N) = scieppend

sceppe f. _a dry measure_, NC 319. [_ON._ skeppa]

sceptlōh, sceptōg (#Gl#) = sceaftlō

scer = scear

scer- = scear-, scier-, scir-

scerero (OET) = scearra  [[headword spelled “scēarra”]]

scernicge (= ie) f. _actress, female jester_, _A_; MH, #Rd# (sciren-).

+scert _shortened_, OEG 130. [scyrtan]

sceruru = scearra  [[headword spelled “scēarra”]]

scēt = scēat pret. 3 sg. of scēotan.

scēte = scȳte

scetel (#KGl#) = scyttel

scett = sceatt

scēð = (1) scēað; (2) scegð

sceðdǣd (æ) f. _injurious deed, crime_, WW.

sceð-nes, -enes f. _hurt, injury_.

±sceððan^6 and wv. (ea, y) _to scathe, injure, hurt, crush, oppress,
disturb_. [sceaða]

sceððend † m. _adversary_.

+sceððendlic _hurtful_, DR 118^16.

sceððu f. _hurt, injury_, #Lcd# 1·342^17.

sceðwrǣc _hurtful, wicked_, #Bl# 161^33.

sceu- = scu-

scēu- = scū-

scēwyrhta = scēowyrhta

scīa m. _shin, leg_, #Gl#.

sciccels, sciccel (y) m. _coat, mantle, cloak_.

sciccing m. _mantle, cloak, cape_, #Gl#.

scīd n. _thin slip of wood, shingle, billet_, _Gl, WW_. [‘_shide_’]

scīdhrēac m. _rick or heap of firewood_, EC 351.

scīdweall m. _wooden palings_, WW 146^28.

+scīe = +scȳ

-scīelan (ȳ) v. be-s.  [[under “bescȳlan”]]

scield (e, i, y) m. _‘shield,’ protector_, _Bl, Ph_: (±) _protection,
defence_, _VPs_; AO, CP: _part of a bird’s plumage_? #Ph# 308.

scield- v. also scild-.

±scieldan (i, eo, y) _to protect, ‘shield,’ (‘i-shield’) guard, defend,
defend oneself_, _Æ, B, Bl, VPs_; CP. +scieldod _furnished with
shields_, _Bl_.

sciele (CP) pres. sg. subj. of sculan.

sciell f. ‘_shell_,’ _Cp, MH_; OEG: _shell-fish_: _scale_, _CP_; Æ, AO.
[scalu]

sciellfisc (i, y) m. ‘_shell-fish_,’ _Bo_.

-sciellig (y) v. stān-s.  [[under “stānscylig”]]

scielliht (e) _having a shell_, #Lcd#.

sciendan = scendan

scīene (ē, ēo, ī, ȳ) _beautiful_, _Cr, Gen_ (ē), _Pa, Ph_ (ȳ): _bright,
brilliant, light_, _Cr_ (ȳ). [‘_sheen_’]

scīenes (ēo, ī, ȳ) f. _suggestion, instigation_, CP. [scȳan]

scienn = scinn, scīn

scīenð pres. 3 sg. of scīnan.

±scieppan^6 (e, i, y) _to create, form, make_, _Gen_: _order, destine,
arrange, adjudge, assign_, _B, Wy_. [‘_shape_,’ ‘_i-shape_’]

±Scieppend m. _Creator_, _B_ (y); CP. [‘_sheppend_’]

±scieran^4 (æ, e, eo, i) _to cleave, hew, cut_, _An, B_: _cut hair_, _Æ,
CP_: _receive tonsure_, _Guth_: _‘shear’ sheep_, _BC_. pp. scoren
_abrupt_, CP 215^8.

scierden (e) adj. _of sherds_, GPH 400. [sceard]

sciering (e) f. _shearing, shaving_, CM 610.

±scierpan I. _to deck, clothe, equip_, ÆL (y). [sceorp] II. (e, y) _to
sharpen_, _A, VPs_: _rouse_. [‘_sharp_’]

+scierpla (i, y) _clothing, garments_.

scierseax = scearseax

scīet pres. 3 sg. of scēotan.

scīete (ē, ī, ȳ) f. _cloth, towel, shroud_, _Æ, BH, Cp, Mk, WW_.
[‘_sheet_’]

scife = scyfe

±sciftan _to divide, distribute, allot_, _LL_ (y): _place, order,
arrange_, _LL, W_ (y). [‘_shift_’]

scild = scield

scild- = scyld-

scildburh † (e, y) f. _shield-wall, phalanx_: _roof of shields,
testudo_: _castle, fortress_, #Sat# 309 (e).

scilden f. _protection_, WW 52^17.

±scild-end, -ere (ie, y) m. _protector, defender_.

scildfreca (y^1) m. _warrior_, B 1033.

scildhete m. _foe_, #An# 85. [scyld]

scildhrēoða (y^1, e^2, ea^2) m. _shield, buckler_: _testudo, phalanx_.

±scildnes (ie) f. _defence, protection_.

scildtruma (y^1) m. _testudo, phalanx_, _Æ, OEG_. [‘_sheltron_’]

scildung f. _protection_, Æ.

scildweall (y^1) m. _wall of shields_, B 3118.

scildwiga (y^1) m. _warrior_, B 288.

scildwyrhta (y^1) m. _shield-maker_.

scile (CP) pres. subj. of sculan.

scilfix = sciellfisc

scilfor _yellow, golden_, OEG.

scill = sciell

scilling (y) m. _‘shilling’ (consisting of a varying number of pence),
silver coin_, _Æ, G, LL_ (v. 2·640), _WW_.

scillingrīm n. _count of shillings_, #Wid# 92.

scima m. _ray, light, brightness, effulgence, splendour_, CP: _twilight,
gloom_. [scīnan]

scimerian (y) _to glisten, shine_, OEG 23^51; _NC_ 319. [‘_shimmer_’]

scīmian _to shine, glisten_, _ÆGr, LkL_: _grow dusky, dim, be dazzled,
bleared_, Æ. [‘_shim_’]

scīn == scinn

scīnan^1 (ȳ) _to ‘shine,’ flash_, _Æ, BH, Bl, Bo, Cp, Mt_; CP: (+)
_shine upon, illuminate_.

scinbān n. ‘_shin-bone_,’ _WW_.

scinccing (OET p. 26) = sciccing

+scincio np. _the fat about the kidneys_, #Lcd#.

scindan = scendan

scīndlāc = scīnlāc

scīnefrian _to glitter_, WW 348^19.

scinelāc = scīnlāc

scīnende ‘_shining_,’ _MH_ (y), _WW_: _eminent, distinguished_, _BH_.

scīnendlic _shining_, #LPs# 18^9.

scīnfeld (ēa) m. _Elysian fields, Temple_.

scīngedwola m. _phantom_, WW 455^11.

scīngelāc ‡ n. _jugglery, magical practices_.

scinhosu f. _greave_, OEG.

scīnlāc I. n. _sorcery, magic_: _apparition, spectre, delusion,
superstition_: _frenzy, rage_, AO. II. = scīnlǣce I.

scīnlǣca m. _wizard, magician_, AO(ā^2).

scīnlǣce I. _magic, spectral_, AO. II. f. _sorceress, witch_.

scinlic (y) _spectral_, NC 320.

scinn (CP) n., scinna m. _spectre, illusion, apparition, phantom, evil
spirit_.

scinncræft (y) m. _sorcery, magic_, AO.

scinncræftiga m. _sorcerer_, GD 27^15; LL 248[7].

scinnere m. _magician_, #Gl#.

scīnnes I. f. _radiance_, MkL 13^24. II. = scīenes

scinnhīw n. _spectre, illusion, phantasm_.

scīnsēoc _spectre-haunted_, #Lcd# 1·364^4.

scinu (y) f. ‘_shin_,’ _WW_.

scip (y) n. ‘_ship_,’ _BH, Bo, Cp_; AO, CP.

scīp == scēap

scipbroc n. _hardship on ship-board_, #Bl# 173^6.

scipbrucol (y) _destructive to shipping_, GPH 401^9.

scipbryce m. _right to claim wreckage_, _KC_ 4·208. [‘_shipwreck_’]

scipȳbme (y) f. _ship’s trumpet_, GPH 391.

scipcræft m. _naval force_, #Chr# 1048#d#.

scipdrincende _shipwrecked_, DR 61^16.

scipe m. _pay, teage_, _WW_; Æ 31^55: _position, rank_. [‘_shipe_’]

scipehere = sciphere

scipen (e, y) f. _‘shippon,’ stall, cattle-shed_, _A, BH_ (y).

scipere (y) m. _shipman, sailor_, _Chr_. [‘_shipper_’]

scipfæreld n. _voyage_, GD 273^18.

scipfæt n. _a vessel in the form of a ship_, WW 124^8.

scipfarend m. _sailor_, BH 3·15 (title).

scipfērend m. _sailor_, #An# 250.

scipfierd f. _naval expedition, fleet_, AO.

scipflota m. _sailor, pirate_, #Chr# 937#a#.

scipforðung f. _equipment of ships_, LL 314[´].

scipfultum m. _naval aid, naval reinforcements_, #Chr# 1049#c#.

scipfylleð _private jurisdiction exercised over a group of three
hundreds_, KC 6·240 (v. BT).

scipfyrd = scipfierd

scipfyrdung f. _fleet, naval expedition_: _fitting out of ships_.

scipfyrð(r)ung f. _equipment of ships_.

scipgebroc n. _shipwreck_, AO, CP.

scipgefeoht (y) n. _naval battle_, GPH 389.

scipgefēre n. _sailing_, BH 150^2.

scipgetāwu f. _tackling of a ship_, WW 181^24.

scipgyld n. _ship-tax, ship-money_, Ct.

sciphamor m. _hammer for giving a signal to rowers_, WW.

sciphere m. _naval force, fleet (usu. hostile)_, _squadron, armada_,
AO, #Chr#: _crew of a warship_.

scipherelic _naval_, #HGl# 406^40.

sciphlǣder f. _ship’s ladder_, WW.

sciphlæst (y) m. _ship-load, crew_, AO, CP: _ship of burden_.

sciphlāford m. _master of a ship, skipper_, WW 181^21.

scipian _to take ‘ship,’ embark_: (±) _man or equip a ship_, _Chr_.

scipincel n. _little ship_, WW.

sciplād (y) f. _journeying by sea, sailing_, BH 198^29.

sciplæst = sciphlæst

sciplic _naval_, #Gl#.

sciplið n. _naval force_, #Chr# 1055#c#.

sciplīðend m. _seaman, sailor_: _voyager_, ÆL 33^138.

sciplīðende ptc. _sailing_.

scipmǣrls m. _ship’s rope, cable_, WW.

scipmann m. _‘shipman,’ sailor, rower_, _BH, Chr_ (y): _one who goes on
trading voyages_.

scipp- = sciepp-

sciprāp m. _ship’s rope, cable_, AO.

sciprēðra (y) m. _rower, sailor_.

sciprōðor n. _ship’s oar or rudder_, WW 455^18.

sciprōwend m. _rower, sailor_, WW 455^14.

scipryne m. _passage for ships_, Ct.

scipsetl n. _bench for rowers_, WW.

scipsōcn f. = scipfylleð

scipsteall (y) m. _place for ships_, BC 3·316^16.

scipstēora m. _steersman, pilot_, CP.

scipsteorra m. _pole-star_, #Lcd# 3·270^20.

scip-stīera, -stȳra = scipstēora

scip-tearo, -ter, n., gs. -tearos scip-t(e)ara, -te(o)ra m. _(ship-tar),
bitumen, pitch_.

sciptol m. _passage money_, Æ.

scipwealh m. _servant whose service is connected with ships_? (BT); _one
liable to serve in the fleet_? (Swt), EC 376.

scipweard m. _ship-master_, #An# 297.

scipwered n. _crew_, WW 451^17.

scipwīsan (on) adv. _like a ship_, Æ.

scipwyrhta m. ‘_shipwright_,’ _WW_ 112^5.

scīr I. (ȳ) f. _office, appointment, charge, authority, supremacy_, _AO,
Cp_; CP: _district, diocese, see, province_, _‘shire,’ parish_, _AO,
LL_; Æ: _tribe_. II. adj. _bright, gleaming, shining, resplendent_, _B,
Bo_: _clear, translucent_, _Cr, WW_: _pure, unmixed_, _B, Bo_: _white_,
Jn 4^35. [‘_shire_’]

sciran = scieran

scīran (ȳ) _to make clear, say, tell, declare_, _B, CP_: _arrange,
determine, decide, decree, act in authority_, CP: (±) _clear from, get
rid of_, AO, CP.

scīrbasu _bright purple_, WW 193^12.

scīrbisceop m. _bishop of a diocese_, WW 173^30.

scīre adv. _brightly_, _An_: _clearly_: _mightily_, _Cr_ 1142.
[‘_shire_’]

scīre- = scīr-

scīrecg _keen-edged_, #Lcd# 1·390^7.

scirenicge (#Rd# 9^9) = scernicge

scīresmann = scīrmann

scirfemūs f. _shrew (mouse)_, WW 477^16. [sceorfan]

scīrgemōt n. _shire-moot_.

scīrgerēfa m. ‘_sheriff_,’ _KC_.

scīrgesceat (ȳ) n. _property of a see_, Ct.

scīrham _clad in bright mail_, B 1895.

±scirian (e, y) _to ordain, appoint_: _allot, assign, grant_: (+) _mark
off, count, reckon_.

sciriendlic (y) _derivative_, WW 222^23.

scīrigmann = scīrmann

scīrlett n. _piece or measure of land_, Ct.

scīrmǣled _splendidly marked, brightly adorned_, #Jud# 230.

scīrmann (ȳ) m. _governor of a shire, prefect, sheriff, steward,
procurator, official_, _KC_; Æ, CP; v. LL 2·649: _inhabitant of a
district_, Æ. [‘_shireman_’]

scīrnes f. _elucidation_, WW 279^23.

scirp- = scierp-

scirseax = scearseax

scīrðegen m. _thane of a shire_, BC 1·544^8.

scirung f. _separation, rejection_, RB 109^21.

scir-wæter (scyr-) n. _water forming a boundary_, #Chr# 656#e#.
[scieran]

scīrwered _brightly ornamented_? _bright_? #Gu# 1262.

scīrwita m. _chief man of a shire_, W.

scītan^1 _to ease oneself_.

scīte = scȳte

scitefinger = scytefinger

scitol _purgative_, #Lcd# 66a.

scitte f. _purging_, _Lcd_. [‘_shit_’]

scittels (_Æ_) = scyttels  [[under “scyttel”]]

sclāt (#Gl#) = slāt pret. 3 sg. of slītan.

scleacnes (#KGl#) == sleacnes  [[headword spelled “slēacnes”]]

scmēgende (#VPs#) = smēagende pres. ptc. of smēagan.

scnīcend (#Gl#) = snīcend pres. ptc. of snīcan.

scō = scōh

sco- = sceo-

scōas = scōs v. scōh.

scobl = scofl

scōc pret. 3 sg. of sceacan.

scocca = scucca

scocha (= scohha) ‘_lenocinium_’, Ep 579.

scōcnyll m. _signal for putting on shoes_, ANS 84·10.

scōd I. pret. 3 sg. of sceððan. II. v. scōgan.

+scōe = +scȳ

scōere m. _shoemaker_, _Gl_. [‘_shoer_’]

scōf pret. 3 sg. of sceafan.

scofen pp. of scufan.

scofettan _to drive hither and thither_, CP 169^13.

scofl f. ‘_shovel_,’ _A, Cp, Ep_.

scōgan pp. sc(ē)od _to ‘shoe,’_ _Æ, CP_.

scōh, scō, scēo m. gs. nap. sc(ē)os, gp. sc(ē)one, dp. sc(ē)on, scōum
‘_shoe_,’ _JnL, Mt, WW_.

scōhere = scōere

scōhnægl m. _shoe-nail_, WW.

scōhðēn (ēo) m. _shoe-cleaner_, RBL 91^9.

scōian = scōgan

scōl f. ‘_school_,’ _Æ, Lcd_; AO.

+scola m. _debtor_, WW 15^28. [sceal]

+scōla m. _fellow-student_, OEG 2271.

scolde pret. 3 sg. of sculan.

scōlere m. _‘scholar,’ learner_, _A, LL_.

scolh (WW 241^13) = seolh

scōliere = scōlere

scōlmann m. _scholar, pupil_: _client_.

scolu I. (eo) f. _troop, host, multitude_. [‘_school_’] II. = scōl

scom- = scam-

scōmhylte (scomm-?) n. _shady copse, thicket_, WW 411^3.

scōn = scēon v. scēoh.

scon- = scan-

scop (eo) m. _singer, poet_, _B, Bo_; AO. [‘_scop_’]

scōp pret. 3 sg. of scieppan.

scopcræft m. _poetry_, #ÆGr# 215^9.

scopgereord (eo^1) n. _language of poetry_, BH.

scoplēoð n. _poem_, AO.

scoplic _poetic_, OEG 119.

scora m. _hairy garment_, WW 278^1.

scoren pp. of scieran.

scorian (eo) I. _to refuse_, Æ. II. _to jut out_.

scorp = sceorp

scort (eo, y) _‘short,’ not long, not tall_, _Bo, GD_ (eo): _brief_, _Æ,
Bo, CP_.

scortian _to become ‘short,’ shorten_, _Lcd_ (eo): (±) _run short,
fail_.

scortlic _brief_, _Sc_ 214^16 (eo). adv. -līce _‘shortly,’ briefly,
soon_, _AO_; Æ.

scortnes f. _‘shortness,’ small amount_: _summary, abstract_, _Æ_ (eo):
_short space of time_.

scortwyrplic (eo) _shortly coming to pass_, #Lcd# 3·156^2.

scoru _a ‘score,’_ NC 320. [scoren; scieran]

scōs gs. of scōh.

±scot (eo) n. _‘shot,’ shooting_, _OEG_; AO: _darting, rapid motion_,
_Men_: _what is shot forth_, _AO, CP_: (+) _scot, payment_: _private
apartment, sanctum, chancel_, Æ.

scoten pp. of scēotan.

+scotfeoht n. _shooting, battle_, #PPs#.

scotfrēo _scot-free, free of tribute_, Ct.

±scotian (co) (tr. and intr.) _to move rapidly, shoot, hurl a
javelin_, Æ.

scotlīra m. _calf of the leg_, #Lcd#.

scotspere n. _dart, javelin_, #HGl# 405.

Scottas mpl. _the Scots_, Æ, CP.

scotung (co) f. _shooting_: _missile_.

scōum v. scōh.

scōung f. _provision of shoes_, LL 450[10].

-scrād v. scrīðend-s.

  [[Cross-reference does not appear to exist; it may be an error for
  “v. scrīðend [_see_ scrīðan], scrāð” as separate words.

  Entry from first edition:
  scrād _a moving body_? (v. scrīðan), _a vessel_? _a body of
  travellers_, BT.]]

scrādung = scrēadung

scræb m. _cormorant_? _ibis_? Cp 1311.

±scræf (ea, e) n. [obl. cases occly. have scraf-] _cave, cavern, hole,
pit_, Æ, CP: _hovel_, Æ.

+scrǣpe = +scrēpe

scrætte f. _adulteress, prostitute_, #Gl#. [_L._ scratta]

scrǣwa = scrēawa

scrāf pret. 3 sg. of scrīfan.

scraf- v. scræf.

scrallettan † intr. _to sound loudly_.

scranc pret. 3 sg. of scrincan.

scrapian _to scrape_, _IM_. [‘_shrape_’]

scrāð pret. 3 sg. of scrīðan.

scrēad, scrēade f. _‘shred,’ cutting, scrap_, _WW_.

±scrēadian _to ‘shred,’ peel, prune, cut off_, _Æ_.

scrēadung (ā) f. _shred, cutting, fragment_, _MtL_: _pruning, trimming_,
_WW_. [‘_shredding_’]

scrēadungīsen n. _pruning-knife_, _WW_. [v. ‘_shredding_’]

screaf = scræf

scrēawa m. _‘shrew’ (mouse)_, _Gl_.

screb = scræb

scrēc = scrīc

scref = scræf

scremman _to cause to stumble_, Æ.

±screncan _to cause to stumble, ensnare, deceive_, _CP, Ps_: (+) _cause
to shrink or shrivel_, _MtL_ 13^6. [‘_shrench_’]

+scrence _withered, dry_, LkL 6^8.

+screncednes f. _tripping up_, #CVPs# 40^10.

screodu v. scrid.

+scrēope = +scrēpe

screopu = screpu

screpan^5 _to scrape, scratch_, _Lcd, MkR_. [‘_screpe_’]

scrēpan _to become dry, withered_, MkR 9^18.

±scrēpe (ǣ, ēo) _suitable, adapted, fit_. adv. -līce.

+scrēpnes (oe) f. _convenience_, Cp 568.

screpu (eo) f. _strigil, curry-comb_, #Gl#.

scrēwa = scrēawa

scrīban (#Gl#) = scrīfan

scrīc (ē, ū) _shrike, missel-thrush_? #Gl#.

scrid I. n. nap. screodu _vehicle, chariot, litter_. II. _quick, fleet_,
#An# 496.

scrīdan = scrȳdan

scridon pret. pl. of scrīðan.

scridwǣn m. _chariot_: _curule chair_.

scridwīsa m. _charioteer_, WW 150^14.

+scrif n. _judgement, edict_, WW.

±scrīfan^1 _prescribe, ordain, allot, assign, impose (punishment)_,
_LL_; Æ: _hear confession, ‘shrive,’_ _LL_: _have regard to, be troubled
about, care for_, CP.

scrifen ptc? _painted_? #Rim# 13.

scrift m. _prescribed penalty or penance_, _LL_: _absolution_, _LL_:
_confessor_, _CP, Cr_; Æ: _judge_. tō scrifte gān _to go to confession_,
_W_. [‘_shrift_’]

scriftbōc f. _book of penances_.

scriftscīr f. _confessor’s area of jurisdiction_: _diocese_, LL 164[26].

scriftsprǣe f. _confession_, LL.

scrimman^3 _to shrink, contract_, _Lcd_ 2b. [‘_shrim_’]

scrīn (ȳ) n. _chest, coffer, ark_, _Æ, Jn_: ‘_shrine_,’ _Æ_: _cage (for
criminals)_. [_L._ scrinium]

±scrincan^3 _to ‘shrink,’ contract, shrivel up, wither, pine away_, _Æ,
AO, Lcd_.

scrind f. _swift course_? #PPs# 103^24.

scringan = scrincan

-scripel (y) v. ear-s.

scrīpen, scrīpende ‘_austerus_,’ LkLR 19^21.

scripeð (_Cp_) pres. 3 sg. of screpan.

scripp m? _scrip, bag_, ÆH 1·394.

scritta m. _hermaphrodite_, WW.

scrið (v. OEG 2185) = scrid I.

scrīðan^1 _to go, move, glide_, _B, Gu_. [‘_scrithe_’; _Ger._ schreiten]

scriðe m. _course_, #Met# 28^11.

-scrīðol v. wīd-s.

scroepe, scrōpe = scrēpe

scrofel n? _scrofula_, #Lcd# 182a.

scrūc = scrīc

scrūd n., ds. scrȳd _clothing, dress_: _garment, vestment_, _Æ, WW_.
[‘_shroud_’]

scrūdelshūs n. _sacristy, vestry_, ANS 84^15. [scrȳdan]

scrūdfeoh n. _money for buying clothes_, NC 320.

scrūdfultum m. _grant towards providing clothes_, Ct.

scrūdland n. _land bequeathed as provision for clothing_, Ct.

scrūdnian = scrūtnian

scrūdwaru f. _garb_, LL.

scruf [_Lcd_] = scurf

scruncon pret. pl. of scrincan.

scrūtnian (ūd) _to examine, scrutinize, consider_, Æ.

scrūtnung (ūd) f. _search, investigation_, #Lcd, ERPs#.

scrybb f. _scrub, brushwood_, TC 525^22.

scrȳd v. scrūd.

±scrȳdan _to clothe, dress_, _Æ_ (ī), _Bl, Lk, Mt_. [‘_shride_’]

scryft = scrift

scrynce _withered_, JnL 5^3.

scua m. _shadow, shade, darkness_: _protection_.

scucca m. _sprite, evil spirit, demon_, _B, Bo, Mt_ (eo): _the devil_.
[‘_shuck_’]

scuccen (eo) _devilish_, NC 319.

scuccgyld (eu^1) n. _idol_, #PPs# 105^26.

scūdan^2 _to run, hurry_? #Gu# 828.

scūfan^2 (ēo) _to ‘shove,’ thrust, push_, _Æ, Ma, MH_; Æ: _push with
violence, urge, impel_, _Met_: _push out, expel, deliver up_: (†)
_display_: (intr.) _to move, go_.

sculan anv. pres. 1 sing, sce(a)l(l), scal, pl. sculon (eo), pret.
sc(e)olde, sc(e)alde _to be obliged_ (_‘shall,’ have to, must, must
needs, am bound to, ought to_), _Æ, AO, Bo, CP_: _owe_, _Mt, Lk_.

scul-dor m., nap. -dru, -dra, +scyl-dru, -dre ‘_shoulder_,’ _Bl, Ep,
Lcd_.

sculdorhrægl n. _cape_, WW 327^24.

sculdorwærc m. _pain in the shoulders_, #Lcd#.

sculdur = sculdor

scule pres. subj. of sculan.

sculthēta (WW) = scyldlǣta

±scunian _to ‘shun,’ avoid_, _Guth_: _be afraid_, _DR_: (tr.) _abhor_,
_TC_.

scunung f. _abomination_, LHy 6^23 (? for on-s.).

scūr (ēo) m(f). _‘shower,’ storm, tempest, trouble, commotion, breeze_,
_An_ (ēo), _LkR, Ps_; CP: _storm of battle_? _shower of blows_? #Jud#
79.

scūra † m. _shower (of rain)_.

scūrbeorg f. _roof_, #Ruin# 5.

scūrboga m. _rainbow_, #Gen# 1540.

±scurf (eo) n. ‘_scurf_,’ _BH_: _a skin-disease_, _Lcd_.

scūrfān _rainy, stormy_, A 9·369; MF.

scurfede ptc. _rough, scabby_, #Lcd#.

scurfende ptc. _scabby_, #Lcd#.

scūrheard † _made hard by blows (epithet of a sword)_.

scūrsceadu ‡ f. _protection against storms_.

scutel I. m. _dish, platter_, _WW_ 280^22. [‘_scuttle_’] II. = scytel

scuton pret. pl. of scēotan.

scuwa = scua

+scȳ npl. _pair of shoes_.

scȳan? scȳn? _to suggest, persuade, prompt, incite, tempt_.

scyccel, scyccels = sciccels

scydd m. _twist on a hillside_? (Earle); _alluvial ground_? (BT), KC.

scȳde pret. 3 sg. of scēon and scȳan, scȳn.

scyfe (e, i) m. _shove, pushing, precipitation, furtherance,
instigation_, CP. tō +sc. _head-long_.

scyfel, scyfele f. _woman’s hood, head-dress_, #Gl#.

scȳft pres. 3 sg. of scūfan.

scyftan = sciftan

+scȳgean _to furnish with shoes_, TC 616^26.

scyhhan _to shy (of a mule)_, ES 43·318.

scyhte † pret. of a vb. *scyccan? _impelled, prompted, urged_, #Gen#
898; #Gu# 98.

scyl I. _sonorous, shrill_, #Rim# 27. [‘_shill_’] II. = sciell

scylcen f. _female servant, slave, concubine_, ÆH 2·162^33. [scealc]

±scyld I. (e) f. _offence, fault, crime, guilt, sin_, CP: _obligation,
liability, due, debt_, CP. [sculan; _Ger._ schuld] II. = scield

scyld- = scield-, scild-

+scyldan _to accuse_, LL 156[11].

scyldfrecu f. _wicked craving_, #Gen# 898.

scyldful _sinful, guilty_.

scyldgian _to sin_: (+) _place in the position of a criminal, render
liable to punishment_.

scyldgung f. _sum demanded as_ ‘wergeld,’ LL 156[11].

scyld-hata, -hete † m. _enemy_.

scyldian = (1) scyldgian; (2) scyldan

scyldig (e, i) (usu. w. g.) _guilty, criminal, sinful_, _Æ, B_; CP.
ealdres sc. _having forfeited his life_: _liable, responsible, in debt
to_, CP. [‘_shildy_’]

scyldigian = scyldgian

scyldignes f. _guilt_, DR.

scyld-lǣta [-hǣta? cp. sculthēta] m. _bailiff_, WW 230^20.

scyldlēas _guiltless_, #Lcd#.

scyldo = scyld I.

+scyldru v. sculdor.

scyldu = scyld I.

scyldung = (1) scildung; (2) scyldgung

scyldwīte n. _fine for a crime of violence_, LL 567[38].

scyldwreccende ptc. _avenging sin_, #Cr# 1161.

scyldwyrcende † _evil-doing_.

scyle pres. subj. of sculan.

scylēagede = sceolhēgede  [[under “sceolhēge”]]

scylf m. _crag, peak_, Mdf: _pinnacle, turret, tower_, Æ.

-scylfan v. ā-s.

scylfe m. _shelf_: _floor_.

scylfig _rocky_, OEG (scylp-).

scylfisc = sciellfisc

scylfor = scilfor

scylfrung (i) f. _shaking, swinging_? #Bl# 99^34; WW.

scylfð pres. 3 sg. of scelfan.

scylga = scealga

scylian (= ie) only in sc. of māle _to pay off, discharge_, _Chr_ 1049.
[‘_shill_’]

scyll = sciell

scyllan _to resound, sound loudly_, _WW_ 215^15. [‘_shill_’]

scylling = scilling

scylp == scylf

scyltumend m. _helper_, #PPs# 27^8.

scylun (N) = sculon pres. pl. of sculan.

scymrian = scimerian

scȳn v. scȳan.

scȳn- = scīn-

±scyndan I. (e) (tr., intr.) _to hurry, hasten, drive forward, impel_:
_incite, exhort_, CP. II. = scendan

scyndel m. _disreputable person_? A 8·321.

scyndendlīce adv. _hastily_, WW.

+scyndnes = +sceandnes  [[redirected to “scandnes”]]

scȳne = scīene

scȳnes, scȳnnes = scīenes

+scynian _to shun, dread_, DR 32^5.

scynn n. _skin, fur_, #Chr# 1075#d#. [_ON._]

scynu (_WW_ 307^27) = scinu

scyp I. m. _patch_, v. ES 43·316. II. (_Chr_ 1048) = scip

scypen = scipen

scypian _to take shape_, #Lcd# 3·146^15.

scypp- = sciepp-

scyr- = scear-, scier-, scir-

scȳr == scīr

±scyrdan (ie) _to harm, injure, destroy_. [sceard]

+scȳrdan = +scrydran  [[variant of “scrȳdan”?]]

scyrf = scurf

scyrft _scarifying_? _scraping_? Cp 130#s#.

scyrfð pres. 3 sg. of sceorfan.

scȳrmǣlum adv. _stormily_, #Bo# 47^25. [scūr]

scyrp- = scierp-

±scyrtan tr. _to shorten_: intr. _run short, decrease, fail_. [sceort]

scyrte f. _skirt_, GPH 393. [‘_shirt_’]

scyrtest superl. of scort.

scyrting f. _shortening, abstract, epitome_, Æ.

scyrtra comp. of scort.

scȳt pres. 3 sg. of scēotan.

scyte (ē) m. _shooting, hurling_, AO: _stroke, blow_, _ZDA_: _dart_.
[‘_shute_’; scēotan]

scȳte f. _‘sheet,’ linen cloth_, _BH, Cp, Mk_. [scēat]

scytefinger m. _forefinger_.

scyte-heald, -healden _inclined, sloping, precipitous_, #Gl#.

scytel I. (u) m. _dart, arrow_, _Erf, Ps_: _tongue of a balance_.
[‘_shuttle_’] II. m. _excrement_. [scītan]

scytelfinger = scytefinger

scytels = scyttel

scyterǣs m. _headlong rush_, WW 426^7.

scytere m. _shooter_, Ct.

scytheald = scyteheald

scytta m. _shooter, archer_, Æ, AO.

scyttan (usu. for-sc.) _to bolt_, _‘shut’ to_, _Æ_: _discharge, pay
off_.

scyttel, scyttels (e, i) m. _bolt, bar_, _Æ, Bl, ZDA_ (e). [‘_shuttle_’;
scēotan]

Scyttisc I. _Scotch, Irish_. II. _Irish or Scotch language_. [Scottas]

scyððan = sceððan

sē m., sēo f., ðæt n. pers. (dem.) pron. _he, she, it, that, this_: rel.
pron. _who, which_: def art. ‘_the_.’ II. = sǣ. III. = swā

sēa (_OET_) = sēaw

sēad (NG) = sēod

sēada = sēaða

seafian (NG) = seofian

seah pret. 3 sg. of sēon.

seaht = seht I.

seal = sealh

sealde pret. 3 sg. of sellan.

±sealdnes f. _act of giving_, WW 389^35: _grant, gift_, Ct.

sēales gs. of sealh.

sealf (a) f. _‘salve,’ ointment, unguent, medicament_, _Lcd, Mk_; CP.

sealfbox (e) m. _salve-box_, G, #Bk#.

sealfcynn n. _an unguent_, WW 351^30.

sealfe = sealf

sealfer- = seolfer-, seolfor-

±sealfian _to ‘salve,’ anoint_, _WW_.

sealfie = salfie

sealf-lǣcnung, -lǣcung (WW 114^16) f. _curing by unguents, pharmacy_.

sealh (a) m., gs. sēales _willow_, _Lcd, Ps_; Mdf. [‘_sallow_’]

sealhrind f. _willow-bark_, #Lcd#.

seallan = sellan

sealm (a, eo) m. _‘psalm,’ song_, _RB, Ps_; Æ, CP.

sealma (e) m. _bed, couch_.

sealmcwide m. _psalm_, #LPs# 97^5.

sealmfæt n. only in phr. ‘on sealmfatum,’ ‘_in vasis psalmorum_,’ #PPs#
70^20.

sealmgetæl n. _number of psalms_, RB.

sealm-glīg, -glīw n. _psaltery, psalmody_, #LRPs#.

sealmian _to play an accompaniment on the harp_, _Ps_ 107^1. [‘_psalm_’]

sealmlēoð n. _psalm_, #BlPs# 56^9.

sealmlof n. _psalm_, #LPs#.

sealmlofian _to sing psalms_, #LPs# 104^2.

sealmsang m. _psalm_: _composition or singing of psalms_, Æ: _psaltery_,
#CPs# 32^2.

sealmscop (eo^2) m. _psalmist_, Æ, CP.

sealmtraht m. _exposition of psalms_, Æ.

sealmwyrhta m. _psalmist_, _Æ_. [‘_psalm-wright_’]

sealobrūn = salubrūn

sealt I. n. ‘_salt_,’ _Lcd, Mt_ (a); CP. II. adj. _salt, briny_, _Cr_;
AO, CP. [v. Mdf]

sealtan^7 _to ‘salt,’_ _IM_.

sealtbrōc (a) m. _brook running from salt-works_? KC 3·206^30.

sealtere I. m. _‘salter,’ salt-worker_, _WW_; Æ. II. (CM 362, 679) =
saltere

sealtern n. _salt-works_, _BC_. [‘_saltern_’]

sealtfæt n. _salt-cellar_, _A, WW_. [‘_saltfat_’]

sealthālgung f. _consecration of salt_, OET 587 (a^1).

sealtherpað (a) m. _road to salt works_, KC 3·206^26.

sealthūs n. ‘_salt-house_,’ _WW_.

sealtian _to dance_. [_L._ saltare]

sealticge f. _dancer_, MH 156^14.

sealting f. _dancing_, NC 320.

sealtlēaf n. _‘mozicia,’ a plant_? WW.

sealtmere m. _brackish pond_, EC 449^30.

sealtnes f. ‘_saltness_,’ _VPs_ (a).

sealtsæleða m. _saltness_, #LPs# 106^34; #RPs# (y).

sealtsēað m. _saline spring_, BH 26^22.

sealtstān m. _rock salt_, #Lcd# 1·374^14: _pillar of salt_, _Gen_; Æ.
[‘_saltstone_’]

sealtstrǣt f. _road to salt-works_, Ct.

sealtwīc n. _a place where salt is sold_, KC.

sealtwylle f. _salt spring_, _KC_ (a). [‘_saltwell_’]

sealtȳð † f. _salt wave, sea-wave_.

sēam I. m. _burden, load_, _Æ, LkL, LkR_ (ēo): _bag_: _harness of a
beast of burden_, Æ: _duty of furnishing beasts of burden_. [_‘seam_’]
II. m. ‘_seam,’ suture, junction_, _Æ, WW_.

sēamere I. m. _beast of burden, mule_, WW. [_L._ sagmarius] II. m.
_tailor_, Æ. [sēam II.]

sēamestre f. _sempstress_, _(also of males) sewer, tailor_, _Æ, KC, WW_.
[‘_seamster_’]

sēamhors n. _pack-horse_, WW 119^42.

sēampending m. _toll of a penny a load_, KC.

sēamsadol m. _pack-saddle_, WW 119^41.

sēamsticca m. _an appliance used in weaving_, LL 455[15,1].

sēap pret. 3 sg. of sūpan.

sēar _dry_, _‘sere,’ barren_, _GPH_ 402^69.

seara-, seare- = searo-

sēargian = sārgian

sēarian _to become sere, wither_, _Shr_. [‘_sear_’]

searo (searu) n. _art, skill, cleverness, cunning_: _device, trick,
snare, ambuscade, plot, treachery_, Æ, AO, CP: _work of art, cunning
device, engine (of war)_: _armour, war-gear, trappings_.

searobend m. _artistic clasp_, B 2086.

searobunden _cunningly fastened_, #Rd# 56^4.

searocǣg f. _insidious key_, #Gu# 1118.

searocēap n. _artistic object_, #Rd# 33^7.

searocēne _very bold_, †#PsC# 10.

searocræft m. _artifice, treachery, wile_, Æ: _artistic skill, art_:
_engine, instrument (of torture)_, Æ.

searocræftig _skilful, cunning_.

searofær n. _artistic ship_? #Rim# 65.

searofāh _variegated, cunningly inlaid_, B 1444.

searogemme = searogimm

searogimm m. _curious gem_.

searogrim _fierce, formidable_, B 594.

searohæbbend † m. _warrior_.

searohwīt _brilliantly white_, #Rim# 67.

searolic _artistic, ingenious, cunning_. adv. -līce.

searomete m. _dainty, delicacy_, NC 321.

searonet n. _armour-net, corslet_, B 406: _ensnaring net_, #An# 64; 945.

searonīð † m. _cunning hostility, treachery, strife, battle_.

searopīl m. _artistic javelin_, #Rd# 87^2.

searorūn f. _mystery_, #Creat# 15.

searosǣled _cleverly bound_, #Rd# 24^16.

searoðanc m. _sagacity, ingenuity, skill_, CP: _cunning, artifice_.

searoðancol _shrewd, wise_.

searowrenc (y^1, a^2) m. _artifice, trick_, AO.

searowundor n. _strange object_, B 920.

searu == searo

searw- v. searo.

searwian (æ) _to be deceitful, dissimulate, cheat_.

searwum (dp. of searo) _skilfully_.

searwung = sierwung

seatul, seatl (NG) = setl

sēað I. (ǣ) m. _hole, pit_, _MkL_; CP; Mdf: _well, cistern, spring,
fountain, lake_, Mdf. [‘_seath_’; sēoðan] II. pret. 3 sg. of sēoðan.

sēaða m. _heartburn_? #Lcd# 21a.

sēaw m. _sap, juice, moisture_, _Lcd_. [‘_sew_’]

+sēaw _succulent_, #Lcd# 95b.

seax n. _knife, hip-knife, short sword, dirk, dagger_, _Æ_ (e), _B, Cp_
(æ); CP. [‘_sax_’]

seaxbenn (siex-) f. _dagger-wound_, B 2904.

Seaxe, Seaxan mpl. (gp. Seaxna) _Saxons_, AO.

Seaxland (e) n. _England_, #Shr# 16^4.

±sēcan I. _to search for, ‘seek’ (‘i-seche’), inquire, ask for, look
for_, _B, Bo, BH, Jul_; Æ: _strive after, long for, wish, desire_, _Jn_;
CP. s. on, tō _look to for, expect from_, CP: _visit, go to_, _AO, B_;
Æ: _approach, attain to_, _Bl, Ps_: _attack, pursue_, _B, Chr_; AO: _go,
move, proceed_, _Æ_. II. (#KGl#) = sȳcan

secce (B 600) = sæcce, gs. of sacu.

secful (#KGl#) = sacful

secg I. m. (n) _‘sedge,’ reed, rush, flag_, _Gl, Lcd, WW_; Mdf. II. † f.
_sword_. III. † m. _man, warrior, hero_, _B_. [‘_segge_’] IV. m.
_ocean_, OET.

secga m. _sayer, informant_, LL 396[4].

±secgan (æ) _to ‘say’ (‘i-seggen’), speak, inform, utter, tell, recite_,
_Æ, Bl, G_; AO, CP, Æ: _signify, mean_, _Æ_: _attribute to_: (+)
_avoid_? LkL p 3^8. s. on _accuse of, charge with_, Æ.

secge f. _speech_, #Cr# 190.

secgend m. _speaker, narrator_, CP.

secggan = secgan

secggescere f. _grasshopper_, Cp 464.

secgihtig _sedgy_, WW 200^27.

secglēac n. _sedge-leek, rush-garlic_, #Lcd#.

secgplega m. _sword-play, battle_, #An# 1355.

secgrōf _brave_? #Ruin# 27.

secgscara m. _landrail, corncrake_, WW 287^11 and #n#.

sēcnes f. _visiting_, LkR 19^44 (oe).

sēd (#VPs#) = sǣd

+sēdan _to satisfy_, #PPs# 106^8. [sæd]

sēde = sægde pret. 3 sg. of secgan.

sedinglīne = stedinglīne

±sedl (NG) = setl

sefa (eo) m. _mind, spirit, understanding, heart_, †CP 9^10.

sēfer- = sȳfer-

sefian = seofian

sēfre = sȳfre

sēft comp. adv. _more softly_.

±sēfte _soft, pleasant, comfortable, easy_: _gentle, mild_: _effeminate,
luxurious_.

sēftēadig _prosperous_, #Seaf# 56.

sēftlic _luxurious_, AS 38^3.

sēftnes f. _rest, quietness, tranquillity, peace_, Æ, AO.

segc- = secg-

segel == segl

segen = (1) sægen; (2) segn

+segenlic (A) = +sewenlic

segg = secg

segl I. mn. ‘_sail_,’ _AO, Bo, MH_; Æ: _veil, curtain_, #Cr# 1139:
_pillar of cloud_, #Ex#. II. = sigel

±seg-lan, -lian (i) _to ‘sail,’_ _AO_: (+) _equip with a sail_.

seglbōsm m. _bellying sail_, #Gl#.

seglgerǣde n. _sail-tackle_, TC 549^17.

seglgyrd mf. _sail-yard, yard, cross-pole_, _Cp_ (e^2), _WW_.

seglian = seglan

seglrād f. _(sail-road), sea_, B 1429.

seglrōd f. _sail-rod, sail-yard_. [v. ‘_rood_’]

seglung f. ‘_sailing_,’ _BH_.

segn mn. _sign, mark, token_, _Gen_: _ensign, banner_, _BH_. [‘_senye_’;
_L._ signum]

segnberend m. _warrior_.

segnbora m. _standard-bearer_, #Rd# 41^20.

segncyning m. _king before whom a banner is borne_ (BT), #Ex# 172.

segne f. _‘seine,’ drag-net_, _Ex, JnL_.

±segnian (ǣn) _to make the sign of the cross, cross oneself, consecrate,
bless_, _Æ, BH_. [‘_sain_’]

segnung f. _blessing, consecration_.

sēgon = sāwon pret. pl. of sēon.

seh (#VPs#) = seoh imperat. of sēon.

seht I. mf. _settlement, arrangement, agreement_, _KC_: _friendship,
peace_, _BH_ (ea). II. adj. _reconciled, agreed, at peace_, _BC_.
[‘_saught_’]

±sehtian _to conciliate, settle_, _LL_. [‘_saught_’]

±sehtlian (a, æ) _to reconcile, to come to an agreement_, #Chr#.

±sehtnes f. _agreement, reconciliation, peace_, _Æ_. [‘_saughtness_’]

sēhð = sēcð pres. 3 sg. of sēcan.

±sehðe [= seh ðu] interj. _behold!_

seigl = segl

seign = segn

seim _fat_, #EPs# 62^6. [_Late L._ sagimen]

seista = siexta

sel sn. = sæl

sēl I. adj. comp. sēlra (_Mt_), sēlla (_B_), sȳlla, superl. sēlest
(_Lk_), sēlost _good, great, excellent, clever, skilful_, AO: _noble,
honourable_: _fitting, fit, advisable_: _sound, healthy, happy,
prosperous_. [v. ‘_sele_’] II. (ǣ) comp. adv. (also sēlor) superl.
sēlost _better, more effectually, rather, sooner, in preference_, Æ, CP.
[sǣl]

sēlan (OET, Ct) = sǣlan I.

selcūð = seldcūð

seld † (æ) I. n. _hall, palace, residence_. II. n. _seat, throne, daïs_,
_VPs_. [‘_seld_’]

+selda † _comrade, retainer_.

seldan adv., comp. seldor, seldnor, superl. seldost _‘seldom,’ rarely_,
_CP_; Æ.

seldcūð _unusual, rare, strange, novel_, _Bo_; Æ: _various_, _WW_.
[‘_selcouth_’]

seldcyme m. _infrequent coming_, #Rd# 1^14.

selde f. _vestibule_, WW 183^99.

seldguma m. _retainer_? B 249.

seld-hwanne (CP), -hwænne (Æ) adv. _seldom, rarely_.

seldlic _rare, strange, wondrous_, _B_ (syll-), _Met_ (sell-): _select,
choice, excellent_. adv. -līce, Æ. [‘_selly_’]

seldnor, seldor, seldost v. seldan.

seldon = seldan

seld-sīene (_AO_), -sȳnde (_KC_) _rare, extraordinary, unfamiliar_.
[‘_seldseen_’]

seldun (_CP_), seldum (_Sol_) = seldan

sele m. _hall, house, dwelling, prison_. [_Ger._ saal]

+sele m. _tabernacle_, #EPs# 14^1.

seledrēam † m. _hall-joy, festivity_.

seleful n. _hall-goblet_, B 619.

selegesceot n. _‘tabernaculum,’ tent, lodging-place, nest_, M. [_Ger._
geschoss]

selegyst m. _hall-guest_, B 1545.

selen (y) f. _grant, gift_: _tribute_, MkL p5^1: _munificence_, OEG.
[sellan]

±selenes f. _tradition_: (+) _giving_, DR.

selerǣdend † m. _hall ruler or possessor_.

selerest f. _bed in hall_, B 690.

selescot = selegesceot

selesecg m. _retainer_, #Wa# 34.

selest pres. 2 sg., seleð pres. 3 sg. of sellan.

sēlest v. sēl.

seleðegn ‡ m. _hall-thane, retainer, attendant_.

seleweard m. _hall-warden_, B 667.

self I. (eo, i, y) pron. (str. and wk.) ‘_self_,’ _AO, B, CP_. mid him
selfum _by himself_: _own_, _B_: adj. _same_, _CP_. II. == sealf

selfǣta (y) m. _cannibal_, #An# 175.

selfǣte f. _a plant, wild oat_? #Lcd#.

selfbana (o^2) m. _one who takes his own life_.

selfcwala (y) m. _one who takes his own life_.

selfcwalu (y) f. _suicide_, #Wy# 56.

selfdēma, self-demere (RB), -dēmende (OEG 58^19) (y) m. _‘sardbaita,’
monk living, subject only to his own rules_.

selfdōm m. _doing as one likes, independence_.

selfe v. swā.

selflic (y) _spontaneous, voluntary_, OEG.

selflīce I. n. _self-love_, _‘amour propre,’ pride, vanity_, CP:
_egotism_, CP 25^7. II. adj. _egotistic, puffed up, vain_, CP.

selfmyrðra (y) m. _one who takes his own life_, WW 424^25.

selfmyrðrung (y) f. _suicide_.

selfren = seolfren

selfsceafte _not begotten_, #Gen# 523.

selfswēgend (y) m. _vowel_.

selfwealdlīce (eo^1, e^2) _arbitrarily_.

selfwill n. _own will, free-will_.

selfwille _spontaneous, voluntary_, _Bo, Met_. adv. -willes, _Æ, RB_
(y). [‘_selfwill_’]

selfwillende _voluntary_, #LPs# 67^10.

selfwillendlīce _indulgently_, GD 289^5.

selian = sylian

sēlig == sǣlig

sēlla = sēlra, v. sēl.

±sellan (ea, i, ie, y) (w. d. pers. and a. thing) _to give, furnish,
supply, lend_, _Æ, B, Mt_; AO, CP: _give up, betray_, _JnL_: _entrust,
deliver to_: _lay by, hide_, WW 212^41: ‘_sell_,’ _Æ, Jn_: _promise_.
āð s. _make oath, swear_, LL.

sellen = selen

sellend (y) m. _giver_: _betrayer_.

sellendlic adj. _to be given_, NC 321.

sellic = seldlic

selma (#Gl#) = sealma

selmerige = sælmerige

selnes = selenes

sēlor, sēlost, sēlra v. sēl.

selt- = sælt-, sylt-

selð pres. 3 sg. of sellan.

sēlð = sǣlð

+sēm n. _reconciliation_, LL 10[10].

sēma (ī, ȳ) m. _arbitrator, judge_, #ÆGr#, GD.

±sēman I. _to smooth over, put right, settle, reconcile, pacify_, _AO,
Chr, LL_. [‘_seem_,’ ‘_i-seme_’] II. = sīeman

sēmann (#Run# 45) = sǣmann

sēmend (ǣ) m. _conciliator, arbitrator_, LL.

sēmestre = sēamestre

semian = seomian

semle = simble

semnendlic _sudden_, GB 235^4. adv. -līce _by chance_.

semninga (M) = samnunga

semtinges = samtinges

senap = senep

±sencan, tr. _to sink, plunge (in water)_, _submerge, drown_. [sincan]

sendan I. (±) _to ‘send’ (‘i-send’), send forth, despatch_, _BH, Bl, CP,
MtL_; Æ, AO: _impel, drive_, _MkL_: _throw, hurl, cast_: _put, place,
lay_. II. _to feast, banquet_, B 600? [sand]

senderlīce (#KGl# 74^27) = synderlīce

senderlīpe (#HGl#) = synderlīpe

sendlic adj. _about to be sent (on a journey)_, RBL 113^4.

sendnes f. _sending_, WW.

+sēne = +sīene

senep m. _mustard_. [_L._ sinapi]

senepsǣd n. _mustard-seed_, #Lcd#.

sengan (æ) _to ‘singe,’ burn slightly_, _LL_ 449[6,2].

sēnian = segnian

senn (#HGl# 519) = synn

senop = senep

senoð (#Chr#) = sinoð

senscipe = sinscipe

senst, sent = sendest, sendeð pres. 2 and 3 sg. of sendan.

senu = sinu

sēo I. f. gas. sēo(n) _pupil (of eye)_, Æ. II. pron. v. sē. [‘_she_’]
III. gs. of sǣ. IV. pres. 1 sg. of sēon. V. pres. 2 sg. subj. of bēon
(wesan).

sēoc _‘sick,’ ill, diseased, feeble, weak_, _Bl, Bo, Chr_; Æ, CP: (†)
_wounded_: _morally sick, corrupt_, _Jul, RB_: _sad, troubled_,
_FAp, Gu_.

sēocan = sēcan

sēoclian = sīclian

sēocmōd _delicate (in health)_, NC 321.

sēocnes f. _‘sickness,’ disease_, _LL, W_: _a disease_, _Lcd_ 3·126.

sēod (ēa) m. _scrip, purse, bag_, Æ.

seodo, seodu = sidu

seofa = sefa

seofafald (DR) = seofonfeald

seofan, seofen = seofon

seofeð- = seofoð-

seofian (e, ea, i, y) _to sigh, lament_, CP.

seofon ‘_seven_,’ _Æ, AO, BH_.

seofonfeald ‘_sevenfold_,’ _A, Æ, BB_.

seofonfealdlīce adv. _seven times_.

seofongetel (e^2) _the number seven_, OEG 1533.

seofonlēafe f. _tormentilla, setfoil (plant)_, #Lcd# 1·232.

seofonniht fp. _week_.

seofonnihte adj. _seven days old_, #Lcd#.

seofon-tēoða (AO), -te(o)g(e)ða ‘_seventeenth_,’ _BH_.

seofontīene ‘_seventeen_,’ _BH_ (y^3); AO.

seofontīenenihte _seventeen days old_, #Lcd# 3·180.

seofontīenewintre _seventeen years old_, AO 190^30.

seofontig _seventy_, AO.

seofontīne = seofontīene

seofonwintre (y) _seven years old_.

seofoða I. ‘_seventh_,’ _MtL_; Æ, AO, CP. II. = sifeða

seofoðe _seventhly_, LL 158[18].

seofung f. _lamentation_. [seofian]

seoh imperat. of sēon.

seohhe f. _sieve_. [sēon II.]

seohhian _to drain, filter_, ÆP 172^31.

seohter m., seohtre (i) f. _drain, ditch_, Ct (Mdf).

seolc, seol-oc, -uc m. _‘silk,’ silken cloth_, _Bo_ (io), _Lcd_.

-seolcan v. ā-s.

seolcen (i) _‘silken,’ made of silk_, _WW_; Æ.

seolcwyrm m. ‘_silkworm_,’ WW.

sēoles v. seolh.

seolf (#VPs#) = self

seolfer = seolfor

seolfern = seolfren

seolfor (i, io, u, y) n., gs. seolfres _silver_, _CP_; Æ.

seolforfæt n. _silver vessel_, BH 252^16.

seolforgewiht (y) m. _silver-weight_, #Lcd# 3·92^14.

seolforhammen _plated with silver_, EC 225.

seolfor-hilt, -hilted (_TC_) ‘_silver-hilted_.’

seolforsmið m. ‘_silversmith_,’ _WW_.

seolforstycce m. _piece of silver_, A 9·8.

seolfren (e, i, y) _made of silver, ‘silvern,’_ _Bo, Chr_.

seolfring (y) m. _silver coin_, Æ.

seolh m., gs. sēoles ‘_seal_,’ _AO, Lcd, WW_.

seolhbæð n. _seal’s bath, sea_, #Rd# 11^11.

seolhpæð? n? _seal’s path, sea, ocean_, #An# 1710.

seolm (WW 101^16) = sealm

seoloc, seoluc == seolc

seolofr- = seolfr-

seoloð (io^1, e^2) m. sea, B 2367?

seolufr- = seolfor-, seolfr-

sēom = sēam I.

seomian † (e) _to be tired, lie at rest, tarry, continue, stand_: _hang,
swing, sway_: _lower (as a cloud)_: _lay wait for_, B 161.

sēomint (WW 136^31?) = sǣminte

±sēon I. (sv^5) _to ‘see’ (‘i-see’), look, behold_, _B, G, Ps, Rd_:
_perceive, understand_, _Cr, Ps_: _inspect, visit_: _experience,
suffer_, _B, Cr_. sīh ðe _lo! behold!_ II. (sv^1) tr. _to sift, strain,
filter_, Æ, AO: intr. _run, ooze, trickle_. III. v. sēo. IV. = sīen

seon- = sin-

seondon = sind pres. pl. ind. of wesan.

sēonian _to languish_, GD 284^2. [_OHG._ siunōn]

seono (i^1, u^2) f. ‘_sinew_,’ #An# (io); _B, Lcd_.

seonobend f. _sinew-band_? #Deor# 6.

seonobenn f. _injury to a sinew_, #Wy# 19.

seonod = sinoð

seonodolg n. _injury to a sinew_, #An# 1408.

seonoð == sinoð

seonwe gs. of seonu.  [[under “seono”]]

seorðan^3 _to lie with_, MtL 5^27. [_ON_?]

seorwum (Cp) = searwum, dp. of searo.

sēoslig _afflicted_, #Gu# 899. [sūsl]

sēota = sǣta

seotl = setl

seotol = (1) setl; (2) sweotol

seotu nap. of set.

±sēoðan^2 _‘seethe,’ boil_, _Lcd_ (ȳ): _be troubled in mind, brood_,
_B_: _afflict, disturb_.

seoððan = siððan

-sēoung (ēu) v. ēag-s.

sēow pret. 3 sg. of sāwan.

sēowan, sēowian (ī, ȳ) _to ‘sew,’ knit together, link, unite_, _Æ,
Cp_ (īo).

seox = siex

seoxter = sester

sep (_GPH_ 391) = sæp

sēpan † _to instruct_.

serc m., serce f. (y) _‘sark,’ shirt_, _WW_: _corslet, coat of mail_.

serede = sierwde pret. 3 sg. of sierwan.

serew- = searw-

serw- = sierw-

serð = seorð, imperat. of seorðan.

sescle f. _sixth part_. [_L._ sextula]

sess m. _place for sitting, seat, bench_.

sessian _to grow calm_, #An# 453.

sesta = siexta

sester (eo, y) m. _a certain measure of bulk_, Æ: _vessel, pitcher_, Æ.
[_L._ sextarius]

set n. (±) _seat, entrenchment, camp, stall, fold_: _setting (of the
sun)_. [sittan]

+set n. _ambush_, DR 37^10.

sētan = sǣtian

sete imperat. of settan.

+setednes = +setnes

setel (CP) = setl

seten I. f. _set, shoot, slip_, #VPs#: _plantation_: _occupied_
(_tilled_?) _land_, LL 118[68]. II. pp. of sittan.

+setennes = +setnes

seterndæg = sæterndæg

setgong = setlgang

sethrægl n. _covering for a seat_.

sētian = sǣtian

setin (#Gl#) = seten

setl (æ, ea, eo, i, o) n. _seat, stall, sitting, place, residence_, _Æ,
B, BH_; CP. tō setle gān _to set (of the sun_), Æ: _throne_ (_of a king,
or bishop, hence) see_, CP, Æ: _siege_, AO. [‘_settle_’]

+setl n. _assembly_, OEG 1753.

+setla (æ) m. _one sitting beside_, ÆL 2^237: _assessor, fellow-judge_,
OEG 56^20.

setlan _to ‘settle,’ (cause to sit), place, put_, _Whale_.

setlgang m. _setting, sinking_, Æ.

setlgangende ptc. _setting_, BH 476^13.

setlhrægel n. _seat-cover_, Ct.

setlrād f. _setting, sinking_, #Ex# 109.

setlung f. _sitting, setting_.

sētn- = sǣt(n)-

±setnes (+ exc. in N) f. _foundation, creation_, _MtL_: _institution,
law, ordinance, decree, will_, _Æ, BH, Mk_: (+) _record, narrative_; (+)
_sentence, paragraph, figure of speech, composition_. [‘_i-setness_’]

setol = setl

sēton = sǣton pret. pl. of sittan.

setrægl = sethrægl

settan (±) _to make to sit, ‘set’ (‘i-set’), lay, put, deposit, place,
fix_, _Æ, B, Bl, Bo, Gen, LL_; CP: _set or put down_, _El, LL_; Æ: (±)
_appoint, assign, institute, prepare, ordain, make, found, build_, _Æ,
AO, Bl, BH, Ps_: _sow, plant_, _Cp, Cr, Gen, MtL_: _settle_ (tr. and
intr.), _abate, subside_, _Bl, Lcd_: _compose, compile, write_, _Bo,
Guth_; Æ: _translate_: (+) _people, garrison_, _Bl_: _be situated_,
_MtL_: _set off_: _lay in wait_, #LPs# 9^30. s. ūt _issue, send forth,
dismiss_. s. of _displace, depose_. sīð s. _travel, journey_, _El_.
±s. wið, ongean, _compare_. s. tō gafole _let land_. [sittan]

settend m. _creator, ordainer_, #Da# 333.

+settendlic _appointed, canonical_, CM 362.

settere = sǣtere

setðorn m. _a kind of tree_, EC 291´.

+setu † np. _dwelling, abode_.

sētung = sǣtung

±sēðan _to affirm, testify_, Æ: _prove_. [sōð]

seðel (NG) = setl

±sēðend m. _asserter, affirmer_.

+sēðnes f. _affirmation_, NC 296.

seððe = sehðe

±sēðung f. _affirmation, proof_, Æ.

sēw = sēow pret. 3 sg. of sāwan.

sewen = sawen pp. of sēon.

+sewenlic _visible_. adv. -līce.

sex (NG) = (1) siex; (2) seax

Sexland = Seaxland

sexta = siexta

sī 3 p. sg. pres. subj. of wesan.

sibæðeling m. _related noble_, B 2708.

sibb (y) (v. LL 2·651) f. _relationship_, _AO, B_; Æ: _love,
friendship_: _peace, happiness_, _BH, Chr, VPs_; AO, CP [‘_sib_’]

±sibb _related, akin_, _B, LkL, W_. as sb. _kinsman, kinswoman_, _W,
Soul_. [‘_sib_,’ ‘_i-sib_’]

sibb- = sib-

sibbecoss m. _kiss of peace_, ES 33·176.

sibbegedriht = sibgedryht

±sibbian (y) _to conciliate, reconcile_, Æ, CP.

sibbs- = sibs-

sibcwide (y) m. _pacific speech_, #Leas# 29.

sibfæc n. _degree of affinity_, LL.

sibgebyrd f. _blood-relationship_, #Gen# 1901.

sibgedryht † f. _related band_: _peaceful host_.

sibgemāgas mpl. _blood-relations_, #Ex# 386.

sibgeornes f. _pacific disposition, friendship, love_, W.

sibge-sihð, -syhð f. _vision of peace_ (lit. trans. of ‘_Hierosolyma_’),
#Ps#.

sibi (#Gl#) sibian = sife, sifian

siblāc n. _peace-offering_, LL 146[2].

sibleger n. _incest_.

siblic _of peace, peaceable_, Æ. adv. -līce.

±sibling m. _relative, kinsman_, Æ. [‘_sibling_’]

siblufu † f. _friendship, love_.

+sibnes f. _affinity, relationship_, WW 345^16.

sibrēden f. _affinity, relationship_, _Chr_ 1127. [‘_sibred_’]

±sibsum _peace-loving, peaceable, friendly_, _CP_. adv. -līce.
[v. ‘_i-sibb_’]

+sibsumian _to reconcile_, Æ.

sibsumnes f. _peace, concord_, _Chr_; CP. [‘_sibsomeness_’]

+sibsumung f. _peace-making_, WW 172^41.

sibun (Cp) = seofon

sīc n. _runnel, small stream_, _BC_; Mdf. [‘_sitch_’]

sīcan I. (sv^1) _to sigh, yearn for_, _AO, PPs_. [‘_siche_’] II. = sȳcan

siccet-, siccett-, siccit- = sicett-

sicclian = sīclian

sice m. _sigh_, _Lcd_ 1·388^11. [‘_siche_’]

sicel = sicol

sīcelian = sīclian

sicer- = sicor-

sicerian _to trickle, penetrate, ooze_, _CP_ 437^14. [‘_sicker_’]

sicettan _to sigh, groan, mourn_, CP.

sicettung f. _sighing, sigh, sob, lamentation_, Æ.

sīcle _sick, ill_, ANS 129·21.

±sīclian (ǣ, ē, ēo, ȳ) _to sicken, become ill or weak_, _Lcd_; ÆL.
[‘_sickle_’; sēoc]

sicol m. ‘_sickle_,’ _A, Mk, WW_ (u^2).

sicor _sure, certain, trustworthy_, _A_: _secure_, _CP_. [‘_sicker_’]

sicorlīce (e^2) _with full certainty_, _NC_ 321; FM 99. [‘_sickerly_’]

sicornes f. _sureness, certainty_, _NC_ 321. [‘_sickerness_’]

sīd _ample, wide, broad, large, vast_, _An, B, Gen_. [‘_side_’]

sīdādl f. _pain in the side, pleurisy_, WW 112^32.

sīdan adv. wīdan and s. _far and wide_, _BC_. [v. ‘_side_’]

sīde I. adv. _amply, widely, extensively_, OEG. s. and wīde _far and
wide_, _El_. [‘_side_’] II. (±) f. ‘_side_,’ _Æ, Bl, CP, Gl, VPs_.
[_Ger._ seite] III. f. _silk_. [_L._ seta; _Ger._ seide]

sīdece m. _pain in the side_, #Lcd# 172a.

sideful (y) _decorous, modest, pure, virtuous, honest_, _Æ_.
[‘_sedeful_’] adv. -līce.

sidefulnes f. _virtue, modesty_, Æ.

sidelic _sober, discreet_, GPH 389.

sidelīce adv. _fitly, suitable_, CP 153.

siden v. ælf-s.

sīden _made of silk_, OEG.

sīdewāre f. _zedoary_, #Lcd# 137b. [_Late L._]

sīdfæðme, sīdfæðmed † _wide-bosomed, capacious (of a ship)_, B.

sīdfeaxe, sīdfeaxode _long-haired_, _Æ_. [v. ‘_side_’]

sīdfolc † n. _great people or number of people_.

sīdian intr. _to extend_? #Rim# 65. [sīd]

+sidian (y) _to arrange, set right, order_. [sidu]

sīdland † n. _extensive land_.

sīdlingweg m. _sidelong way, road that runs obliquely_? (BT), KC
3·446^17.

sido = sidu

sīdrand m. _broad shield_, B 1289.

sidu (eo) m., gds. sida _custom, practice, manner, habit, rite_, CP:
_manners, morality, good conduct, purity_, CP. [_Ger._ sitte]

sidung (y) f. _rule, regulation_, GPH 398.

sīdung (ȳ) f. _extension, augmentation_, A 8·306.

sīdwærc m. _pain in the side_, GD, #Lcd#.

sīdweg † m. _long road_: (in pl.) _distance_.

sīdwyrm (ȳ) m. _silk-worm_, WW.

sīe pres. 1 sg. subj. of wesan (bēon).

siehst pres. 2 sg., siehð pres. 3 sg. of sēon.

+siehð = +sihð

sielf = self

siellan = sellan

siellic = seldlic

±sīeman (ǣ) _to load, burden_, _Æ_ (ȳ), _LkL_ (ē). [‘_seam_’]

siemle = simble

sīen I. (ēo, ī, ȳ) f. _power of sight, sight, vision_, _Jul_ (ȳ), _Lcd_
(ēo): _pupil, eye_. [‘_sene_’] II. (= sīn) pl. pres. subj. of wesan.

siendon, sient (= sindon, sind) pl. pres. of wesan.

+sīene (e, i) _seen, visible, evident, plain_, _B_ (y). [‘_sene_’]

+sīenelic (ē, ȳ) _visible_, BH 216^14. adv. -līce.

sierce = serce  [[under “serc”]]

sīere _‘sere,’ dry, withered_, _BC_ 1·515. [sēarian]

sierian = sierwan

±sierwan (i, y) _to plan, devise, contrive_: _plot, lay snares for,
entrap_, CP: _put on armour_: (+) _fit out, arm, equip_, #Ma# 159.
[searu]

sierwung (ea, y) f. _plotting, artifice, trap, snare, treachery_, Æ.

sieððan = siððan

siex (e, eo, i, y) ‘_six_,’ _AO_.

siexbenn = seaxbenn

siexfeald ‘_sixfold_,’ WW.

siexhund _six hundred_, _AO_. [‘_sixhund_’]

siexta (e, i, y) ‘_sixth_,’ _Chr_; AO.

siexte (y) _sixthly_, LL 158[17].

siextig (e, i, y) ‘_sixty_,’ _AO_.

sife (y) n. ‘_sieve_,’ _Cp, Lcd, WW_.

sifeða (eo, y) m. and fpl. _siftings, chaff, bran_: _tares, rubbish_.

sifian = seofian

sifiða = sifeða

sīfre = sȳfre

siftan (e, y) _to ‘sift,’_ _Æ_ (y), _Bo, Cp_.

sifun = seofon

sig = sī 3 p. sing. pres. subj. of wesan (bēon).

+sig n. _victory_, DR 28^2.

sīgan^1 I. (±) _to sink, set (of the sun)_, _decline_, CP: _descend,
fall, fall down_, Æ: _move, advance, go to, approach_. sāh ūt _came
out_, Æ. II. _to strain, filter, drain out, ooze, trickle_.

sigbēh (NG) = sigebēah

sigdi (_Ep_) = sīðe

sige I. (y) m. _victory, success, triumph_, _AO, Chr_; Æ, CP. [‘_sige_’]
II. m. _sinking, setting (of the sun)_, #Met# 13^56. [sīgan]

sige-bēacn, -bēacen n. _banner_, Æ: _emblem of victory, trophy, cross
(of Christ)_, #El#.

sigebēah m. _victor’s circlet, crown_.

sigebēam † m. _tree of victory, cross_.

sigebearn † n. _victor-child (Christ)_.

sigebeorht _victorious_.

sigebeorn m. _victorious hero_, #Fin# 38.

sigebrōðor m. _victorious brother_, #An# 183.

sigebȳme f. _trump of victory_, #Ex# 565.

sigecempa m. _victorious champion_, †#Ps# 50^10.

sigecwēn † f. _victorious queen_.

sigedēma † m. _victorious judge_.

sigedryhten m. _lord of victory, God_.

sigeēadig _victorious_, B 1557.

sigefæst _victorious, triumphant_, _BH, Bl_. [v. ‘_sige_’]

+sige-fæstan, -fæstnian (e^2) _to triumph_: _crown as victor_.

sīgefæstnes f. _triumph, victory_.

sigefest == sigefæst

sigefolc † n. _victorious people_.

sigegealdor (y^1) n. _victory-bringing charm_, #Lcd# 1·388^13.

sigegefeoht n. _victory_, BH 158^6.

sigegyrd f. _victory-bringing rod_, #Lcd#.

sigehrēmig † (ǣ) _rejoicing in victory_.

sigehrēð f. _fame gained by victory_? _confidence or joy of victory_? B
490.

sigehrēðig † _victorious, triumphant_.

sigehwīl f. _hour of victory_, B 2710.

sigel I. † (æ, e) m? n? _sun_: _name of the rune for =s=_. II. = sigil

sigelbeorht † _sun-bright, brilliant_.

sigele = sigle

sigelēan n. _reward of victory_.

sigelēas _not victorious, defeated_.

sigelēoð † n. _song of victory_.

Sigelhearwa m. _Ethiopian_, #VPs#.

sigel-hweorfa m., -hwe(o)rfe f. _heliotrope_.

sigelic _victorious_, WW.

sigeltorht † _radiant_.

Sigel-waras, -ware pl. _Ethiopians_.

sigemēce m. _victorious sword_, #Cr# 1531.

sīgend m. _wave_, WW. [sīgan]

siger- = sigor-

sīgere m. _glutton_, OET 72^568.

sigerēaf n. _triumphal robe_, WW 153^15.

sigerian = sigrian

sīgerian _to be gluttonous_, WW 489^14.

sigerīce † _victorious, triumphant_.

sigerōf † _victorious, triumphant_.

sigesceorp n. _ornament of victory_, #Gn# 136.

sigesīð (i^2) m. _successful expedition_, OET.

sigespēd † f. _success_.

sigetācen n. _emblem of victory, sign_.

sigetīber n. _sacrifice for victory_, #Ex# 402.

sigetorht _brilliant in victory_, #Sat# 240.

sigetūdor n. _dominating race_, #Gu# 838.

sigeðēod f. _victorious people_.

sigeðrēat m. _victorious troop_, #Cr# 844.

sigeðūf? m. _triumphal banner_, #Jud# 201.

sigewǣpen n. _victorious weapon_, B 804.

sigewang † m. _field of victory_.

sigewīf n. _victorious woman_, #Lcd# 1·384.

sigfæst = sigefæst

sigi- = sige-

sigil, sigl n. _fibula, buckle, brooch, gem_. [cp. sigle]

sigirian = sigrian

siglan (_AO_) = seglan

sigle I. n. _necklace, collar_. II. f. _rye, black spelt_, #Lcd# 48a.
[_L._ secale]

sigor (y) m. _victory, triumph_, Æ. [sige]

sigorbēacen n. _emblem of victory_, #El# 985.

sigorbeorht _triumphant_, #Cr# 10.

sigorcynn n. _victorious race_, #El# 755.

sigorēadig † _victorious_.

sigorfæst _victorious_.

sigorfæstnes (siger-) f. _victory_, A 11·173.

sigorlēan † n. _reward of victory_.

sigorlic _triumphal_, #Gl#.

sigorspēd † f. _good fortune in war_.

sigortācen n. _convincing sign_, #Gu# 1089.

sigortīfer n. _offering for victory_, #Jul# 255.

sigorweorc m. _deed of victory_, #Ex# 316.

sigorwuldor n. _glory of victory_, #Gu# 93.

sigrian _to be victorious, triumph over, vanquish_, Æ.

sigriend m. _victor_, DHy 38^3.

sigsonte f. _a plant_, #Lcd#.

sigðe = sīðe

sihsta = siexta

-siht, -sihte v. blōd-, ūt-s.  [[under “blōdsihte”]]

sīhte _marshy_?

+sīhte = +sȳhte pret. 3 sg. of +sȳcan.

sihtre = seohtre  [[under “seohter”]]

sihð I. f. _thing seen, vision_, _JnL, MkL_. [‘_sight_’] II. pres. 3 sg.
of sēon.

sīhð pres. 3 sg. of sīgan.

+sihð, +siht (ie, y) f. _faculty or act of sight_, _Æ, Bo, Mk_; CP:
_aspect_: _what is seen, vision, apparition_. [‘_i-sight_’]

+sihðe (#BPs# 53^6) = +sehðe

+sihðnes £. _vision_, MtL p7^7.

silcen = seolcen

silf = self

silfor = seolfor

silfren = seolfren

Sīlhearwa (Æ) = Sigelhearwa

sillan = sellan

silofr = seolfor

sīma I. m. _band, chain_, #Gen# 765. II. = sēma

simbel (on) adv. _always, continually_, AO. [cp. simbles]

simbelfarende _roving, nomadic_, AO 26^16.

simbelgefēra m. _constant companion_, #Met# 11^50 (y).

simble (e, y) adv. _ever, for ever, always, constantly, continually,
continuously_. oftost s. _continually_.

simbles adv. _ever, always_.

simblian (y) _to frequent_, DR 15^10.

simb-lunga, -linga (siml-) _continually, constantly_, DR.

simel = (1) simbel adv.; (2) symbel

simeringwyrt = symeringwyrt

siml = simbel

siml- = simbl-

sīn I. (ȳ) refl. possess, pron. _his, her, its, their_. II. = sīen. III.
plur. pres. subj. of wesan.

sin- (y) prefix, _perpetual, permanent, lasting, infinite, immense_.

sinað- = seonoð-

sinbyrnende _ever burning_, #Met# 8^52.

sinc (y) † n. _treasure, riches, gold, valuables, jewel_.

sincald _perpetually cold_, #Ex# 472.

sincaldu f. _perpetual cold_, #Ph# 17.

±sincan^3 _to ‘sink,’ become submerged_, _MtR_: _digest easily, act as
aperient_? _Lcd_ 81b.

sincbrytta m. _distributor of treasure, prince_, A 3·71^17.

sincfæt † n. _precious vessel_.

sincfāg † _richly adorned_.

sincgestrēon † n. _treasure, jewel_.

sincgewæge ‡ n. _abundance of treasure_.

sinc-giefa, -gifa † m. _giver of treasure, ruler, chief, lord, king_.

sincgifu f. _gift of treasure_, #An# 1511.

sincgim † m. _valuable gem, jewel_.

sincgyfa = sincgiefa

sinchroden † ptc. _adorned with costly ornaments_.

sincmāððum m. _treasure_, B 2193.

sincstān m. _precious stone_, #Met# 21^21.

sincðego † f. _receipt of treasure_. [ðicgan]

sincweorðung † f. _costly gift_.

sind plur. pres. indic. of wesan.

sinder (y) n. _‘cinder,’ dross, scoria, slag_, _Cp, WW_; CP.

sinder- = sundor-

sinderlīce = synderlīce

sinderōm m. _rust_, WW 402^41.

sindon plur. pres. indic. of wesan.

sindor = sinder

sindrēam † m. _everlasting joy_.

sindrig (Æ) = syndrig

+sīne = +sīene

sineht _sinewy_, #Lcd# 91a. [seono]

sine-wealt, -weald, -wælt (eo, y) _round, globular, concave_, Æ:
_circular, cylindrical_. [sin-]

sinewealtian _to be unsteady_, WW 515^31.

sinewealtnes f. _roundness, globularity_.

sinewind _artery_, WW 352^25. [seonu]  [[under “seono”]]

sinfrēa m. _husband_, B 1934.

sinfulle f. _houseleek_, #Lcd#, WW.

singal _perpetual, everlasting_, Æ, CP: _continuous, constant_, Æ:
_daily_.

singala, singale, singales adv. _always, ever, continually_.

singalflōwende ptc. _ever-flowing_, WW 177^36.

+singalian (y) _to continue_, #ACPs# 88^51.

singallic _incessant, continual_, CP 61^21. adv. (±) -līce.

+singallician _to continue_, #JPs# 88^51.

singalnes f. _perseverance, assiduity_, OEG.

singalrene m. _constant flow_, #HGl#. [ryne]

±singan^3 (y) _to ‘sing,’ celebrate in song_, _BH, Bl, MtL, VPs_; AO,
CP: _crow, sing (of birds_), _Æ, Ph_: _chant, intone_, _OET, RB_: _read,
recite, narrate_, _Bl, Bo, VPs_: (_of things) sound, resound, ring,
clank_, _B, CP, W_.

+singe (= +sinie?) f. _wife_, #Jul# 54. [cp. sinig]

singendlic _that may be sung_, #LVPs# 118^54.

singere = sangere

singestre = sangestre

singian (Æ) = syngian

singrēne (y) I. f. _house-leek, periwinkle_, _Lcd_. [‘_sengreen_’] II.
adj. _ever green_: _uncooked (of vegetables)_.

singrim adj. _exceeding fierce_, #Jul# 230.

sinhere m. _huge army_, B 2936.

sinhīg- = sinhīw-

±sin-hīwan, -hīgan npl. _wedded couple_, Æ, CP.

sinhīwscipe m. _permanent tie (marriage)_, #Bo# 50^1.

sinhwurf- = sinhwyrf-

sinhwyrfel _round_.

sinhwyrfende ptc. _round_, OEG 114.

+sinig _marriage_, DR 108^7.

+sinigan, sinigian _to marry_, NG.

+sinigscipe = sinscipe

+sinlīce (y) adv. _often_, RB 97^14.

sinn = synn

sinnan^3 † (w. g.) _to meditate upon, think of, care about_: _cease_?
[_Ger._ sinnen]

sinnig = synnig

sinniht † (y^1, ea^2) f. _eternal night_. adv. -nihtes _in continual
night, night after night_.

sinnīð m. _perpetual misery_, #Rim# 52.

sinop = senep

sinoð (e, eo, y) f. _synod, council, meeting, assembly_. [_L._ synodus]

sinoðbōc (e, eo, y) f. _record of the decrees of a synod, canon law_, LL
46[49,8].

sinoðdōm (eo) m. _decree of a synod_, #El# 552.

sinoðgewrit n. _records of a synod_.

sinoðlic _synodical_, BH.

sinoðstōw f. _meeting-place, place where a synod is held_.

sinowalt = sinewealt

sinrǣden f. _(continuing state), marriage_, CP.

±sinscipe (e, y) m. _cohabitation, marriage_, Æ, CP: (+) _married
couple_, CP.

+sinsciplic _conjugal_, LL (440^6).

+sinscippend _married_, GD 218^4.

sinsnǣd f. _large piece_, B 743.

sinsorg f. _perpetual grief_, #Wif# 45.

sint = sind plur. pres. indic. of wesan.

sin-trendende (OEG), -tredende ptc. _round_.

sintryndel (y^1, æ^2) adj. _circular, globular_.

sinðyrstende ptc. (w. g.) _ever thirsting_, AO 130^31.

sinu = seono

sinuwealt, sinwealt = sinewealt

sinwrǣnnes (y) f. _constant lechery_, WW 113^22.

sīo = sēo

siodo = sidu

siofa = sefa

siol- = seol-, sel-

sion _‘laber,’ a marsh plant_? _Lcd_ 1·254. [‘_sion_’]

sipian = sypian

sīpian _to sink low, wane, decline_, #Lcd# 3·151 (v. A 31·538).

sīre = sīgere

sirew-, sirw- = searw-, sierw-

sisemūs f. _dormouse_, WW.

sīst = sīhst pres. 2 sg. of sēon I.

sit pres. 3 sg. of sittan.

sitl = setl

sittan^5 _to ‘sit,’ sit down, recline_, _Æ, B, Bo, Bl, Chr_; AO, CP:
_remain, continue, be situated_, _Bo, Bl, Gen, LL_: (±) _settle, encamp,
dwell, abide, reside_, _Chr, LkL_; AO: _lie in wait, besiege, invest_,
_Chr, Met, VPs_: _preside over_, _Æ, MtL_; CP: _perch, roost_, _Gen,
Ph_: (+) _sit out, finish_. on cnēowum s. _kneel_. wið earm +s. _lean_.
on s. (1) _assail, attack_; (2) _press on, weigh down_.

sīð (ȳ) I. m. _going, motion, journey, errand_, _B, Bl, Lcd_:
_departure, death_: _expedition, undertaking, enterprise_: _road, way_:
_time, turn, occasion_, _Æ, G, Lcd, VPs_; AO. on ānne s. _at one and the
same time_, _Bo, Lcd_. ōðre sīðe...ōðre sīðe _on one occasion...on
another_: _conduct, way of life, manner_, Æ: _fate, destiny,
experience_, _Æ, B, Chr_. [‘_sithe_’] II. adv. _late, afterwards_. comp.
sīð, sīðor _later_. ǣr and s. _always_. ne ǣr ne s. _never_. ǣr oððe s.
_ever_: a comp. adj. sīðra _late, later_, and a superl. sīð(e)mest,
sīðest _latest, last_ are formed from sīð. æt sīðestan _at last,
finally_. III. prep. and conj. _after_. s. ðam _after, afterwards_.
[_Ger._ seit] IV. (±) = ±sihð pres. 3 sg. of sēon I.

+sīð I. m. (rare ds. +sīðan) (†) _comrade, companion_: (†) _follower,
retainer, warrior_: _count, thane_. II. n. _company_, v. LL 2·427; 446.

sīðberend m. _reaper_, WW 235^3. [sīðe]

sīðbōc f. _itinerary_, OEG 2023.

sīðboda m. _herald of departure (the pillar of cloud)_, #Ex# 250.

sīðboren ptc. _late-born_, #VPs#, WW.

+sīðcund _fit to rank as a thane_.

+sīðcundlic _intimate_, BH 120^33 (v.l.).

sīðdagas mpl. _later times_, #El# 639.

sīðe m. ‘_scythe_,’ _Æ, Cp_.

sīðemest, sīðest v. sīð II.

sīðfæt (Æ, CP), sīðfat mn. _way, journey, voyage, expedition_: _path,
road, course_, Æ: _experience, conduct_: _period of time_.

sīðfrom † _ready for a journey_.

sīðgēomor _travel-weary_, #Ap# 1.

sīðian _to go, depart, travel, wander_, _Æ, B_. [‘_sithe_’]

+sīðlic = +sīðcundlic

sīðlīce adv. _lately, after a time_, Æ.

+sīðmægen † n. _band of warriors_.

+sīðmann = +sīð

sīðmest, sīðor, sīðra v. sīð II.

+sīðrǣden f. _troop_, WW 206^21.

+sīðscipe m. _fellowship, society_, BH.

sīðstapel _step, track_, #LPs# 16^5.

sīðð = sīð

siðða adv. and conj. _afterwards_, _JnL, LkL_; #Met#. [‘_sith_’]

siððan, siððon (co, y) I. adv. _since, afterwards, from now on,
hereafter, further, then, thereupon, after, later_, _Æ, Bl_. II. conj.
_as soon as, when, since, after that, inasmuch as_, _Bl, Bo_. III. prep.
(w. a.) (LWS) _after_. [‘_sithen_’; sīð, ðam]

sīðweg (#Gu# 859) = sīdweg

sīðwerod n. _travelling troop_, #Gen# 2114.

±sīðwīf n. _noble lady_.

sīwan = sīwian

siwen pp. of sēon II.

siwen-īge, -igge, -ēge _blear-eyed_, CP.

±sīwian (ēo, ȳ) _to sew, mend, patch_: _knit together, unite_.

six = siex

six-; v. also siex-.

sixecge _six-sided, hexagonal_, WW.

sixfēte (y) adj. _of six (poetical) feet_.

sixgylde _entitled to sixfold compensation_, LL 3[1].

sixhynde _belonging to the class whose_ ‘wergeld’ _was 600
shillings_, LL.

sixhyrnede _having six angles_, WW 179^13 (e^2).

sixnihte _six days old_, #Lcd#.

sixteogoða ‘_sixtieth_,’ _ÆGr_.

sixtēoða ‘_sixteenth_,’ _MH_ (e^1), _ÆGr_ (y^2).

sixtigǣre _60-oared ship_. [ār]

sixtigfeald _sixtyfold_.

sixtigwintre _sixty years old_, Æ.

sixtȳne (y^1, e^2) ‘_sixteen_,’ _MH_.

sixtȳnenihte _sixteen days old_, #Lcd#.

sixtȳnewintre _sixteen years old_.

slā = slāh

slacful (= æ) _lazy_, #Gl, Lcd#.

slacian _to slack off, become remiss_, _Æ_. [‘_slake_’]

slād pret. 3 sg. of slīdan.

slǣ == slēa

slæc _‘slack,’ remiss_, _CP_ 125^1 (v. A 39·366).

slæcan = slacian

+slæccan _to seize_, #VPs# 7^3.

slǣd (ā, ē, ēa) n. _valley, glade_, _AO_; Mdf. [‘_slade_’]

-slǣfan v. tō-s.

slæg- = sleg-

slæge m., slæget n. = slege

slægen pp. of slēan.

slægnǣt = slegnēat

slǣgu (ē) f. _lethargy_, #Gl# (v. A 33·387).

slæht = slieht

slæhtan _to strike, slay_, NG. [_Ger._ schlachten]

+slæhte pret. 3 sg. of +sleccan.

slæhð = sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slēan.

slǣp I. (ā, ē, ēa) m. ‘_sleep_,’ _Æ, CP_: _sleepiness, inactivity_, _B,
CP_: _death_, _Cr_. II. m? _slippery place_? KC.

±slǣpan^7 (ē, ā) pret. 3 sg. slēp, slēap; also wk. slǣpte, slēpte,
slēpde _to ‘sleep,’_ _BH, Bl, VPs_; CP: _be benumbed, motionless,
inactive_, _Æ, CP, Lcd_: _lie with_, _Æ, LL_: _rest in the grave, die_,
_Æ_ (ā), _Mt_.

slǣpbǣre _soporific_, #Lcd# 1·284^22.

slǣpere m. _sleeper_, Æ.

slǣpern (ā, ē) n. _dormitory_.

slǣplēas _sleepless_, GPH 399.

slǣplēast f. _sleeplessness_, Æ.

slǣpnes f. _sleepiness_, HL 14^106.

slǣpor _drowsy, sleepy_.

slǣpwērig _weary and sleepy_, #Rd# 5^5.

slǣt = sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slēan.

slǣtan _to bait (a boar)_, _Æ_. [‘_sleat_’]

slǣting f. _right of hunting_, #Chr# 1087.

slǣw = slāw

-slǣwan v. ā-s.

slǣwð (ē) f. _sloth, indolence_, _Æ, Bo_; CP. [‘_sleuth_’; slāw]

slāg = slāh

slaga m. _slayer, homicide_, Æ, CP.

slagen pp. of slēan.

slagu = slægu  [[headword spelled “slǣgu”]]

slāh, slāg f. _‘sloe’ (fruit of the blackthorn)_, _Cp, Lcd, WW_; Mdf.

slahe = slēa

slāhðorn m. _blackthorn_, _Cp, Lcd_; Mdf. [‘_sloethorn_’]

slāhðornragu f. _lichen from blackthorn_, #Lcd#.

slāhðornrind f. _blackthorn bark_, #Lcd#.

slān I. (K, N) = slēan. II. gs. of slā (slāh).

slanc pret. 3 sg. of slincan.

slāp == slǣp

slāpel = slāpol

slāpfulnes f. _lethargy_, WW 541^42?

slāpian _to become sleepy_, CP.

slāpol _somnolent, lethargic_.

slāpolnes f. _somnolence, lethargy_, Æ.

slāpornes f. _lethargy_, A 11·98.

slāpul = slāpol

slarege (i^2) f. _‘clary’ (plant)_, _Lcd, WW_.

slāt pret. 3 sg. of slītan.

slāw _‘slow,’ sluggish, torpid, lazy_, _Bo, CP, Mt_.

slāwerm (#KGl# 80^22) = slāwyrm

slāwian _to be slow, sluggish_, Æ.

slāwlīce adv. _‘slowly,’ sluggishly_, _CP_.

slāwyrm m. _‘slow-worm,’ snake_, _OEG, Sc, WW_.

slēa f. _slay, weaver’s reed_, #Gl#. [slēan; cp. slege]

slēac (v. A 39·366) _‘slack,’ remiss, lax, sluggish, indolent, languid_,
_Æ, B, BH_; CP: _slow, gentle, easy_, _Æ_.

slēacian _to delay, retard, slacken, relax efforts_.

slēaclic _slow, languid, idle_. adv. -līce.

slēacmōdnes f. _slackness, laziness_, MFH 173.

slēacnes (e) f. _slowness_, _A, Æ, Lcd_: _remissness, laziness_, _CP_.
[‘_slackness_’]

slēacornes f. _laziness_, A 11·98^40.

sleaht = slieht

slēan^6 _to strike, beat, stamp, coin (money)_, _forge (weapons)_, _Æ,
B, Bl, Lcd, VPs_: _throw, cast_, _Bo, Da_: _sting (snake)_: _pitch
(tent)_, _Æ_: _strike across (country)_, _dash, break, rush, come
quickly_, Æ: _‘slay,’ kill_, _Æ, AO, CP_. wæl +s. _to slaughter_: _cast
into chains_: (+) _strike down_: _play (harp)_: (+) _gain by fighting,
win_.

slēap I. pret. 3 sg. of slǣpan. II. pret. 3 sg. of slūpan. III. = slǣp

slēaw = slāw

slēbescōh = slēfescōh

slec- = sleac-

+sleccan _to weaken, disable_, #Cr# 149. [sleac]
  [[headword spelled “slēac”]]

slecg f. _(‘sledge’-)hammer, mallet_, _Nar, WW_; Æ.

slecgettan _to beat, throb_, #Lcd# 82b.

slecgwyrhta m. _metal-worker_, ANS 100·254.

slēd = slǣd

slēf = slīefe

slēfan _to slip (clothes) on_, _Guth_.

+slēfed _furnished with sleeves_. [‘_sleve_’]

  [[Printed inline, as continuation of “slēfan” entry.]]

slēfescōh m. _slipper_, #Gl# (slēbe-).

slēflēas = slȳflēas  [[redirected to “slīeflēas”]]

slege (æ) m. _beating, blow, stroke_, Æ: _slaying, slaughter, murder_,
Æ, AO, CP: _crash, impact, clap (of thunder)_: _destruction, defeat_,
AO: (_weaver’s_) ‘_slay_,’ _WW_ 188^5. [slēan]

slegebȳtl m. _beetle, hammer_, #Lcd# 122b.

slegefǣge _doomed to perish_, #Jud# 247.

slegel m. _plectrum_, WW 466^28.

slegen pp. of slēan.

sleghrȳðer (slægr-) n. _cattle for slaughter_, NC 321.

slegnēat n. _cattle for slaughter_, TC 105^4.

slēgu = slǣgu

sleh = sleah imperat. of slēan.

sleht = slieht

slehð = sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slēan.

slēow = slīw

slēp I. (M) = slǣp. II. pret. 3 sg. of slǣpan.

slēp- = slǣp-

slēpan = (1) slǣpan; (2) slȳpan

sleð (#VPs#) = sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slēan.

slēwð = slǣwð

slī (#Gl#) = slīw

slic (ī?) n. _beater, mallet, hammer_, LL 455^15; WW 75^16.

-slīcod (ȳ) v. nīg-s.  [[under “nīgslȳcod”]]

slīdan^1 _to ‘slide,’ glide, slip, fall, fall down_, _Guth_: _fail,
err_: _pass away, be transitory or unstable_, _MH, Lcd_.

sliddor = slidor

slide m. _sliding, slip, fall_, Æ, CP.

sliderian = slidrian

slidor I. _slippery_, _Ps, Run_. [‘_slidder_’] II. n? _slippery
place_, WW.

slidornes f. _slippery place, slipperiness_, _Ps_. [‘_slidderness_’]

slidrian _to slip, slide_, _CP, PPs_. [‘_sliddern_’]

slīefe (ī) f. ‘_sleeve_,’ _LL_.

slīeflēas ‘_sleeveless_,’ _RB_ (y), _WW_ (e).

slieht (æ, ea, e, i, y) m. _stroke, slaughter, murder, death_, _AO_ (i):
_animals for slaughter_: (+) †_battle_. [‘_sleight_’; slēan]

sliehtswȳn (y^1) n. _pig for killing_, LL.

sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slēan.

slīf, slīfe = slīefe

-slīfan v. tō-s.

slifer _slippery_, #HGl# 405.

sliht (_AO, Æ_) = slieht

-slihtes v. eorð-s.

slihð pres. 3 sg. of slēan.

slīm n. ‘_slime_,’ _CPs, WW_.

slincan^3 _to slink, creep, crawl_.

slincend mn. _reptile_, Æ.

slingan^3 _to worm, twist oneself_. [_Ger._ schlingen]

slipa = slypa

slipeg, slipig _slimy_.

slipor _slippery, filthy_, _Sc_: _shifty_, _Æ_. [‘_slipper_’]

slipornes f. _filthiness_, _DHy_ 36^8. [‘_slipperness_’]

+slit n. _rending, biting_, Æ: _something to be torn or rent_:
_backbiting, calumny_.

±slītan^1 _to slit, tear, split, shiver, rend to pieces, divide_: _bite,
sting, wound_, CP: _backbite_, CP. [_Ger._ schleissen]

slitcwealm m. _death by rending_, LL (166^24).

slite I. m. _slit, rent, tear, bite_. II. f? _cyclamen_.

sliten m. _schismatic, heretic_, MtL p8^9.

slītendlic _gorging_, WW 437^5.

slītere m. _gorger, glutton_, WW: _destroyer_, W 235^24.

+slitglīw n. _raillery_, WW 372^32.

slitnes f. _desolation, destruction, tearing up_.

slitol _biting, pungent_, GPH 394.

slītung f. _tearing, biting_, Æ.

slīðan^1 _to injure, wound_, #GnE# 202.

slīðe † I. adj. _savage, fierce, dire, cruel, hard, hurtful, perilous_.
II. adv. _savagely_.

slīðelic _graven_, #EPs# 105^19.

slīðen _cruel, hard, evil_.

slīðheard (e^2) _cruel, severe, savage_.

slīðnes f. _graven image_, #EPs# 105^36.

slīw m. _a fish, tench, mullet_, #Gl#.

slōg I. pret. 3 sg. of slēan. II. = slōh I.

slōh I. mfn., gs. slō(ge)s, slō; das. slō(h) _‘slough,’ mire_, _BH, W_.
II. pret. 3 sg. of slēan.

-slop v. ofer-s.

slopen pp. of slūpan.

slota m. _morsel_, #Sc# 153^12.

slūma m. _slumber_, _DD, Gu_. [‘_sloom_’]

slūmere m. _sleeper_, NC 322.

sluncon pret. pl. of slincan.

slūpan^2 _to slip, glide, move softly_.

slȳf == slīef  [[variant of “slīefe”?]]

slyht == slieht

slyhð = sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slēan.

slypa m. _slime, paste, pulp_, _Lcd_. [‘_slip_’]

slȳpan (ē) _to slip, put on or off_.

slȳpescōh m. _slipper_, WW 277^29.

slyppe f. _paste_, #Lcd# 163a.

slypræsn n. ? ‘_ferna_,’ WW 237^1. [ræsn]

slȳpð pres. 3 sg. of slūpan.

±smacian _to coax, flatter, allure, seduce_, #HGl# 476; OEG 3005.

smæc m. _‘smack,’ taste_, _WW_: _scent, odour_, _WW_.

±smæccan _to taste_, _ÆGr_. [‘_smatch_’]

smæl I. (often smal- in obl. cases) sup. smalost, smælst ‘_small_,’ _Bo,
Cp, Lcd_: _thin, slender, narrow_, _AO, OET_: _fine_, _BH, CP, Lcd, WW_.
II. v. hēafodsmæl.

smæle = smale

smæleðerm (A 13·323) = smælðearme

smæll m. _slap, smack_, _JnL_. [‘_small_’]

smælðearmas (y^2) mp. _small intestines_.

smælðearme n. _lower abdomen_, CP.

smǣr (smǣre?) m. _lip_, #Gl, Lcd#.

smære- = smeoru-

smǣte _pure, refined_, _Cp, MH_; Æ. [‘_smeat_’]

smǣtegold n. _pure gold_, WW.

smǣtegylden adj. _of pure gold_, WW.

smal- v. smæl.

smale _finely, into small pieces_, _Bo_: _softly (not loudly)_.
[‘_small_’]

smalian _to become thin_, #Lcd# 2a (Harl.).

smalung f. _reducing (of flesh)_, #Lcd#.

smāt pret. 3 sg. of smītan.

smēac pret. 3 sg. of smēocan.

smēade pret. 3 sg. of smēagan.

smēag- v. smēah.

±smēagan, smēan (ē) _to think, think out, reflect, meditate on,
deliberate_, Æ, CP: _examine, penetrate, scrutinize, look closely into_,
Æ: _suppose_: _seek (opportunity)_.

smēagelegen (? v. OEG 4142n.) f. _syllogism_.

smēagendlic _meditative_, #ÆGr# 211^6.

smēagung = smēaung

smēah I. adj. (smēag- in obl. cases) _sagacious, acute, subtle_:
_penetrating_. II. pret. 3 sg. of smūgan.

+smēah n. _intrigue_, #Chr# 1094.

smēalic _searching, exhaustive, careful_, CP: _exquisite_. adv. -līce
_closely, thoroughly, carefully, exhaustively, accurately_, Æ, CP.

smēalicnes f. _subtlety_, NC 322.

smēamettas mp. _delicacies_.

smēan = smēagan

smēang = smēaung

smearcian (e) _to smile_, _Bo_; Æ. [‘_smirk_’]

smeart _smarting, painful_, _W_ 295^10. [‘_smart_’]

smeartung (e) f. _tickling_, A 8·451.

smēað I. f. _meditation_, #SPs# 118^77. II. pres. 3 sg. of smēagan.

smēaðanclīce adv. _in detail_, A 8·309.

smēa-ðancol, -ðancollic _subtle_. adv. -līce _exactly, thoroughly,
exhaustively, studiously_, Æ.

smēaðancolnes f. _exactness, strictness_, ÆH 2·80^34.

±smēaung (ē) f. _reflection, thought_, CP: _inquiry, search_:
_intention, effort_: _intrigue_.

smēawung = smēaung

smēawyrhta m. _skilled artisan_, A 9·263.

smēawyrm m. _intestinal worm_, #Lcd#.

smec == smæc

smēc == smīc

smedma (eo) m. _fine flour, pollen meal_, _Lcd_; Æ. [‘_smeddum_’]

smedmen adj. _of fine flour_, #Sc# 154^1.

smēgan = smēagan

smēgawyrm = smēawyrm

smēh (ÆL 31^952) = smēah II.

smēhwrenc (= smēa-) m. _cunning device_, TC 339.

smelt I. (y) m. _sardine, ‘smelt,’_ _Cp_. II. = smolt

smelting (i, y) f. _amber_, Æ.

smēocan^2 _to emit smoke_, _Æ, Lcd, WW_: _fumigate_, _Lcd_. [‘_smeek_’]

smeoduma = smedma

smēoh = smēah

smeolt = smolt

smeortan^3 _to ‘smart,’_ _AO_ 36^30 (or? fȳrsmeortende = _smarting like
fire_).

smeoru (e), smeoruw n. _ointment, fat, grease, lard, tallow, suet_.
[_Ger._ schmeer]

smeorumangestre (smere-) f. _butter-woman_, LL.

smeorusealf (e^1, a^2) f. _unguent_, #Lcd# 55b.

smeoruðearm (æ^1, e^1) m. _entrail_.

smeoruwig (smere-) _rich, fat_, #Lcd# 79a.

smeoruwyrt f. ‘_smearwort_,’ _Cp, Lcd_.

smeoðian = smiðian

smer- = smear-, smeor-, smir-, smier-

smēr = smǣr

smera = smeoru

smere- = smeoru-

smerian _to laugh to scorn_, MtL 9^24.

smeringwyrt f. _name of a plant_, ‘_crispa, victoriola_,’ WW 135^1. [cp.
smeoruwyrt]

smeruwan = smierwan

smerwung = smirung

smēte- = smǣte-

±smēðan _to smooth, soften, polish_, _CP_: _appease, soothe_, CP.

smeðe (_RB_) = smiððe

smēðe _smooth, polished, soft_, _Lk_; Æ, AO, CP: _suave, agreeable_, CP:
_lenitive_. [‘_smeeth_’]

±smēðian _to smoothen_, _Lcd, OEG_: _become smooth_. [‘_smeeth_’]

smēðnes f. _smoothness, smooth place_, _Æ, WW_. [‘_smeethness_’]

smēung = smēaung

smīc (ē, ȳ) m. _vapour, smoke_, _Æ, AO, Bo, PPs, VHy_. [‘_smeech_’;
‘_smitch_’]

smīcan (ē) _to smoke, fumigate_. [smēocan]

smicer _beauteous, elegant, fair, tasteful_, _Cp, Shr, TC_.
[‘_smicker_’] adv. -ere, CP.

smicernes f. _smartness_, WW 416^31.

+smicerod _well-fashioned_, WW 406^21.

smicor = smicer

smidema = smedma

smīec = smīc

±smierwan (e, i, y) _to ‘smear,’ anoint, salve_, _Bl, G, VPs_ (smirian);
CP. [smeoru]

smilte = smylte

smilting = smelting

smirenes (e, y) f. _ointment, unguent_.

smirewan, smirian = smierwan

smiringele m. _anointing oil_, Æ.

smirung (e, y) f. _ointment, unguent_, _Lcd_: _unction_. [smeoru]

smirwan = smierwan

smītan^1 _to daub, smear, soil, pollute, defile_, _Æ, Cp, Lcd_.
[‘_smite_’]

smitte f? _smudge, smut, blot_, _OEG, RB_. [‘_smit_’]

±smittian _to befoul, pollute_, _WW_: _infect_, _OEG_. [‘_smit_’]

smið m. _handicraftsman_, _‘smith,’ blacksmith, armourer, carpenter_,
_Æ, B, Mt_.

smiðbylg m. _smith’s bellows_, NC 322.

smiðcræft m. _manual art_, BH 442^16.

smiðcræftega m. _skilled workman_, #Gen# 1084.

smiðian (eo) _to forge, fabricate_, _Æ, OEG_. [‘_smith_’]

smiðlīce adv. _dexterously_, WW.

smiððe (smeðe) f. _smithy, forge_, _Æ, BH_. [‘_smithe_’]

smoc m. _‘smock,’ shift_, _WW_.

smoca m. ‘_smoke_,’ _LPs, Nar_ (cc).

smocen pp. of smēocan.

smocian _to emit ‘smoke,’_ _Æ, LPs_: _fumigate_, _Lcd_.

-smogu v. ǣ-s.

-smoh v. in-s.

smolt I. (e, eo) _mild, peaceful, still, gentle_, _MtL_. [‘_smolt_’] II.
_lard, fat_, _CM, NC_. [‘_smolt_’]

smolte = smylte

smoltlīce adv. _gently_, ES 8·477.

smorian _to strangle, choke, suffocate_, _Cp, MtR_. [‘_smore_’]

smōð _‘smooth,’ serene, calm_, _Sc_.

smucon pret. pl. of smēorcan.  [[error for “smēocan”?]]

smūgan^2 _to creep_, Æ. [_Ger._ schmiegen]

smūgendlic _creeping_, #LPs# 68^35.

smȳc = smīc

smȳcð pres. 3 sg. of smēocan.

smygel, smygels m. _retreat, burrow_, #Gl#.

smyllan _to crack (a whip)_, GPH 388.

smylt = smelt

+smyltan _to appease_, BH 386^12.

smylte I. _mild, tranquil, peaceable, calm_, CP: _cheerful, prosperous_.
II. adv. _softly_. [smolt]

smyltelic = smyltlic

smylting (Æ) = smelting

smyltlic _tranquil, serene_.

smyltnes f. _tranquillity, peace, quiet, silence_, CP: _gentleness,
smoothness, mildness, composure, placidity_, CP: _evening calm_.

smyr- = smier-, smir-

smyrels m. _ointment, unguent, unction_, _Æ, LL_. [‘_smerles_’; smeoru]

smytta = smitta  [[headword spelled “smitte”]]

snā = snāw

snaca m. _‘snake,’ serpent_, _Lk, W_.

snacc m. _a small vessel, war-ship_, _Chr_. [‘_snack_’; _Dan._ snekke]

snād = snǣd II.

-snæcce v. twi-s.

snǣd I. m. _handle of a scythe_, _ÆH_ 2·162. [‘_snead_’] II. (ā) m. _a
clearing in a wood_, Ct (Mdf). III. f. _piece, morsel, slice, portion of
food_, _Æ, Lcd_. [‘_snede_’; snīdan]

snǣdan I. (ē) _to cut, slice, lop off, hew_, _Ln, CP, Mt_. [‘_sned_’;
snīðan] II. _to eat, take a meal_, #Chr# 1048.

snǣdel (#Gl#) = snǣdelðearm

snǣdelðearm m. _great gut_, #Gl, Lcd#.

snǣding f. _meal, snack_, CM, RBL.

snǣdinghūs n. _cook’s shop_, WW 185^1.

snǣdingscēap n. _sheep for slaughter_, #PPs# 43^23.

snǣdmǣlum adv. _bit by bit_, #Lcd# 127a.

snægl (e), snægel m. ‘_snail_,’ _Cp, Lcd, WW_.

snǣl = snægl

snǣs = snās

snǣsan (or? onsnǣsan) _to run through, pierce, spit_, LL 69[36]. [snās]

snǣðfeld m. _a defined tract of pasture or woodland_ (v. Mdf). [snǣd]

snās (ǣ) f. _spit, skewer_, WW 237^17 and #n#.

snāð I. pret. 3 sg. of snīðan. II. (?) n? _killing_ (v. OEG 3070).

snāw m. ‘_snow_,’ _Bl, Chr, Met, VPs_: _snowstorm_, _Bo_.

snāwceald _icy-cold_, #Met# 29^8.

snāwgebland n. _snow-storm_, AO 186^34.

snāwhwīt _snow-white_, Æ.

snāwig ‘_snowy_,’ _Lcd_.

snāwīt = snāhwīt  [[headword spelled “snāwhwīt”]]

snāwlic _snowy_.

sneare, snearh f. ‘_snare_,’ _OEG_.

snēdan = snǣdan

snēl, sneg(e)l = snægl

snell _smart, ready, rapid, keen, fresh, brisk, active, strong, bold_,
_An, B, Cr, Ph_; AO. [‘_snell_’]

snellic _smart, ready, quick, rapid, bold_. adv. -līce, _Wy_.
[‘_snelly_’]

snellscipe m. _quickness, boldness_, #Chr# 1057#d#.

snelnes f. _agility_, #ApT# 13^7.

snēome † adv. _quickly, speedily, swiftly_: _immediately, at once_.

+sneorcan^3 (e) _to shrivel, dry up_, #VPs# 30^13.

snēowan^7 (ō) † _to hasten, go_.

snēr f. _harpstring_. [cp. _Ger._ schnur]

+snerc pret. of sneorcan.

snīcan^1 _to sneak along, creep, crawl_, _CP, Lcd_. [‘_snike_’]

snid I. n. _slice_: (+) _slaughter_. [_Ger._ schnitt] II. m. _saw_, CP.

snide I. m. _incision_: _slaughter_. II. = snid II.

sniden pp., snidon pret. pl. of snīðan.

snidīsen n. _lancet_, #Lcd# 78a.

snirian = snyrian

snīte f. ‘_snipe_,’ _Cp, WW_. [‘_snite_’]

±snīðan^1 _to cut, lance_, CP: _cut off, amputate_, _CP_: _hew down,
slay, kill_, _Æ_; CP: _mow, reap_. [‘_snithe_’; _Ger._ schneiden]

snīðstrēo _carline thistle_? (BT) _chopped straw_? (JGPh 1·328), Cp
358#s#.

snīðung f. _incision, wound_: _slaughter_.

snīwan _to snow_, _BH, Cp, Nar_; Æ. [‘_snew_’]

snōca m. _nook_? _inlet_, BC 3·141´ (v. Mdf).

snōd f. _hood, head-dress, fillet_, Æ.

snoffa m. ‘_nausea_,’ CM 50.

snofl _phlegm, mucus_, #Lcd# 9a.

snoflig _full of phlegm_, A 8·299.

snofol = snofl

snoru f. _daughter-in-law_, Æ, AO. [_Ger._ schnur]

+snot n. _mucus_, #Lcd# 20b.

snotor, snoter _clever, prudent, intelligent, discerning_, _MtL_; Æ, CP.
[‘_snoter_’]

snotorlic (e^2) _philosophic, wise_. adv. -līce.

snotornes f. _wisdom, prudence_, Æ.

snotorscipe m. _cleverness in argument, dialectics_, OEG 3215; 2^172.

-snotorung (e^2) v. word-s.  [[under “wordsnoterung”]]

snotorwyrde _wise of speech, plausible_, W 107^1.

snotter, snottor, snottra (wk.) = snotor

snōwan = snēowan

snūd I. adj. _quickly approaching_, #Cr# 842. II. n? _speed_, #An# 267.

snūde adv. _quickly, at once_.

snyflung f. _mucus from the nose_, _NC_ 322. [‘_snivelling_’]

snyrian † _to hasten, hurry_.

snyring _sharp rock_, WW 371^22.

snȳtan _to blow the nose_, _NC_ 322. [‘_snite_’]

snyteru = snyttru

snȳting f. _blowing of nose_, _WW_ 162. [‘_sniting_’]

snytre _clever, wise_, #Gen# 2808.

snytrian _to be clever, wise_.

snytro, snytru == snyttru

±snyttru f. (often in pl.) _wisdom, cleverness, prudence, sagacity,
intelligence_, AO, CP.

snyttrucræft † m. _wisdom, sagacity_.

snyttruhūs n. _house of wisdom_, #PPs# 77^60.

snyttrum adv. _cunningly_.

snyðian _to go nose or beak forwards (of a plough)_, #Rd# 22^6.

-snyðian, -snyððan v. be-s.

soc I. (±) n. _sucking_, _Æ_. [‘_sock_’] II. m. _soakings_, Mdf.

sōc I. pret. 3 sg. of sacan. II. = sōcn

socc m. _‘sock,’ light shoe, slipper_, _Cp, RB_. [_L._ soccus]

socian ‘_to soak_,’ _Lcd_. [sūcan]

sōcn f. _seeking, question, inquiry, case, cause_: _visit, resort_, _Æ,
W_: _attack_, _B_ 1777: _refuge, asylum, sanctuary_, Æ: _the exercise of
judicial power, jurisdiction, right of inquisition, right of taking
fines, revenue_ (v. sacu), _KC, LL_ (v. 2·454): _district in which a_
‘socn’ _was exercised_ (Eng. Hist. Rev. 27·20). [‘_soken_’]

sōcnes = sēcnes

+sod n. _cooking, boiling_, CP.

soden pp. of sēoðan.

sōfte I. (= sēfte) adj. _‘soft,’ mild, gentle_, _Æ_: _quiet, calm,
tranquil, undisturbed_, Æ: _luxurious_: _agreeable_, A 9·28. II. adv.
_Gen, Lcd, Met_.

sōftnes f. _ease, comfort_: _‘softness,’ luxury_, _Æ_.

sogeða (o^2) m. _hiccough, eructation_.

sōht pp., sōhte pret. 3 sg. of sēcan.

sol n. _mud, wet sand, wallowing-place, slough_, CP.

sōl n. _sun_, #PPs# 120^6.

solar = solor

sōlate f. _sunflower, heliotrope_, #Lcd#.

sole f. _shoe, sandal_, WW 125^25. [_L._]

solere = solor

solian _to soil, become defiled_, _Rim_ 67. [‘_sole_’]

sōlmerca m. _sundial_, NC 350.

sōlmōnað m. _February_.

solor m. _loft, upper room_, _CP, Ph_: _‘palatium’ hall, dwelling_, GD
248^14. [‘_sollar_’; _L._ solarium]

solsece (æ^2) f. _heliotrope_. [_L._ solsequia]

som == sam

sōm- = sām-

sōm f. _arbitration, agreement, reconciliation_, _Æ, LL_. [‘_some_’]

+sōm _unanimous, peaceable, friendly_, Æ.

somn- = samn-

somod == samod

sōmrǣden f. _wedlock_, CP 19^18.

somw- = samw-

sōn m. _sound, music_, CP. [_L._ sonus]

sōna adv. _directly, forthwith, immediately, at once_, _Bl, Chr, CP,
MtL, Sat_. s. swā _as ‘soon’ as, when_, _Bl, CP_.

sonc = sanc pret. of sincan.

sōncræft m. _music_, A 13·38^306.

sond == sand

song I. = sang pret. 3 sg. of singan. II. sb. _bed_, NG. [_ON._ sæng]
III. _grape_, EHy 6^32.

sonwald (NG) = sinewealt

sopa m. ‘_sup_,’ _Lcd_. [‘_sope_’]

sopcuppe f. _sop-cup_, Ct.

sopp ‘_offula_,’ ‘_sop_,’ _OEG_ 61^10.

soppian _to soak, ‘sop,’_ _Lcd_ 86a.

sore _mote_, MtL 7^3.

sorg f. (occl. gs. in -es) _‘sorrow,’ pain, grief, trouble, care,
distress, anxiety_, _B, Bl, Bo_; CP.

sorgbyrðen f. _load of sorrow_, #An# 1534.

sorgcearig † _anxious, sorrowful_.

sorgcearu f. _sorrow, anxiety_, #Gu# 939.

sorgful _‘sorrowful,’ sad, anxious, careful_, _Æ, B_; CP: _distressing,
doleful_, _B, Ph_.

sorgian (pres. ptc. sorgende) _to ‘sorrow,’ care, grieve, be sorry for,
be anxious about_, _B, Bl, Bo_; CP.

sorglēas _free from sorrow or care_.

sorglēast (h) f. _security_, #Lcd#.

sorglēoð † (h) _dirge_.

sorglic _wretched, miserable_. adv. -līce. [‘_sorrowly_’]

sorglufu f. _sad love_, #Deor# 16.

sorgstafas, mp. _anxiety, care_, #Jul# 660.

sorgung f. ‘_sorrowing_,’ #w# 114^4.

sorgwīte (h) n. _grievous torment_, W 187^2.

sorgword (h) m. _lamentation_, #Gen# 789.

sorgwylm (æ^2) † m. _wave of sorrow_.

sorh == sorg

sorig _sorry_, CP 227^8.

sot = sott

sōt n. (_what settles down_), ‘_soot_,’ _Cp, Lcd_.

sotel, sotl, sotol = setl

+sotig _dirty, grimy_.

sotman m. _foolish man_, NC 350.

sotscipe m. _dulness, folly_, WW 171^33. [‘_sotship_’]

sott I. adj. _foolish, dull, stupid_. II. m. _dullard, fool_, _A_. open
sott _downright fool_, _Æ_. [‘_sot_’]

sōð I. n. _truth, justice, righteousness, rectitude_, _B, CP, Cr, Sol_:
_reality, certainty_. tō sōðe, tō sōðum _in truth, truly, truthfully,
accurately_. tō sōðan, ðurh sōð _verily, in truth_. II. adj. _true,
genuine, real_, _Bo, Bl_; AO, CP: _just, righteous_. [‘_sooth_’] III. ==
_L._ pro- in compounds, in DR and NG.

sōðbora m. _soothsayer, astrologer_, #Chr# 975#a# (reading doubtful).

sōð-cwed, -cweden _veracious_, NG.

sōðcwide m. _true speech, truth, just saying_: _proverb_, NG.

Sōðcyning † m. _King of truth, God_.

sōðe adv. _truly, really, accurately, rightly_, _B, PPs_. [‘_sooth_’]

sōðes adv. _verily_, _Mt_. [v. ‘_sooth_’]

Sōðfæder m. _Father of truth, God_, #Cr# 103.

sōðfæst (e^2) _true, trustworthy, honest_, _Bl, Chr, Cr, VPs_: _just,
righteous_, _JnL, PPs_. [‘_soothfast_’]

±sōðfæstian _to justify_, NG.

sōðfæstlic (e) _true, sincere_, #An# 876. adv. -līce _truly, honestly_,
OET 452. [‘_soothfastly_’]

sōðfæstnes f. _truth, truthfulness, fairness, fidelity_, _Bl, Bo, CP,
VPs_: _justice_. [‘_soothfastness_’]

sōðfest == sōðfæst

sōðfylgan ‘_prosequi_,’ DR 29^18.

sōðgid (ie^2) † n. _true report_.

sōðhweðere conj. _nevertheless_, NG.

±sōðian _to prove true, bear witness to_, _LL, NG_. [‘_soothe_’;
‘_i-sothe_’]

sōðlic adj. _true, truthful, real, genuine, right_, _Bo_. -līce adv.
_truly, indeed, really, certainly_, _Bl, El, VPs_. conj. _for, now,
then, but_, CP. [‘_soothly_’]

sōðsagol _truthful_.

sōðsagu f. _truth_, _W_: _true story_, _MtL_. [‘_soothsaw_’]

sōðsecgan _to speak the truth_.

sōðsecgendlīce _truly, genuinely_, GD 185^17.

sōðsegen f. _true statement_, Æ.

sōðspǣce _truthful_, W 72^16#e#.

sōðspell n. _true story, history_, MtL p7^2.

sōðsprǣc f. _true saying_, DR 171^18.

sōðtācen n. _prodigy_, DR 43^16.

soðða (_JnL, LkL_) = siðða

sōðword † n. _true word_.

spāca m. _‘spoke’ (of wheel, etc.)_, _Bo, WW_.

spade = spadu

spādl = spātl

spadu (æ) f. ‘_spade_,’ _Æ_. [_L._ spatha]

spæc I. pret. 3 sg. of specan. II. mn? _small branch, tendril_, WW.

spǣc = sprǣc

spǣclēas ‘_speechless_,’ _GPH_ 398^72.

spænð pres. 3 sg. of spanan.

spær _sparing_, #Sc# 52^6.

spær- = spear-

spæren adj. _of plaster_, #Gl#.

spærhende (y^2) _sparing_, #ÆGr#.

spærian (N) = sparian

spærlic (e) adj. _sparing_. adv. -līce.

spærlīra (e, ea, eo) m. _calf of leg_, Æ (ea). [‘_sparlire_’]

spærlīred _with a thick calf_, WW 161^27.

spærnes f. _frugality, nearness_.

spærstān m. _gypsum, chalk_, _WW_. [‘_spar-stone_’]

spǣtan _to ‘spit,’ spew_, _Mk, Jn_; Æ, CP.

spǣtl = spātl

spǣtlan, spǣtlian _to spit, foam at the mouth_.

spǣtung f. _spitting_, #Lcd# 65a.

spala m. _substitute_, LL 484[2,1].

spāld (_El_) = spātl. [‘_spold_’]

spaldur _balsam_, #Gl# (v. ES 37·186).

span = spann

+span n. _persuasion, allurement_, CP.

±spanan^7 _to draw on, allure, seduce, mislead, persuade, instigate_, Æ,
AO, CP.

span-e, -u, pl. -a, -an f. _teat_.

spanere (o) m. _seducer, enticer_, WW.

±spang fn. _clasp, buckle_. [_Ger._ spange]

spann I. f. _‘span’ (measure)_, _BH, WW_. II. pret. 3 sg. of spinnan.

+spann n. _fastening, band, buckle_, CP.

±spannan^7 _to join, link, clasp, fasten, attach_, CP.

spannung f. _span_, WW.

-spanung (i^2) v. for-, lēas-s.  [[headword spelled “lēassponung”]]

sparcian = spearcian

±sparian _to ‘spare,’ be indulgent or merciful to, save_, _BH, CP, VPs_:
_use sparingly, not to use_, _Æ_: _forbear, abstain from_, _Æ_.

+sparrian _to shut, bar_, MtL 6^6.

sparwa = spearwa

spātl (ǣ) n. _spittle, saliva_, _CP, Lcd, NG_. [‘_spattle_’]

spātlian _to spit out_, _WW_ 162. [‘_spattle_’]

spātlung f. _what is spit out, spittle_, _WW_ 162. [‘_spattling_’]

spāðl = spātl

spāw pret. 3 sg. of spīwan.

speaft (MkL 8^23) = speoft

speara = spearwa

spearca (æ, e) m. ‘_spark_,’ _Bo, BH_; CP.

spearcian _to throw out sparks, sparkle_, #Sat# 78? (v. OEG 4029).

spearewa = spearwa

spearhafoc m. _sparrow-hawk_, _WW_. [‘_spar-hawk_’]

spearlīr- = spærlīr-

spearn pret. 3 sg. of spurnan.

spearnes = spærnes

spearnlian _to spurn, kick, sprawl_, Æ.

spearwa I. m. ‘_sparrow_,’ _BH, Chr, Cp, VPs_. II. m. _calf (of the
leg)_, #Gl#.

spec = spic

spēc = spǣc, sprǣc

specan = sprecan

specca m. _‘speck,’ spot_, _Cp, Lcd, WW_.

specfāh _spotted, blotched_, Cp 22.

sped _‘glaucoma,’ sticky moisture, phlegm_, _Cp, OEG_. [‘_spade_’]

spēd f. _luck, success, prosperity_, _El, PPs_: _riches, wealth,
abundance_, _Cr, Gen_; AO: _opportunity, power, faculty_, _Bl_. †_Ps_:
(only in dp. spēdum) _‘speed,’ quickness_, _Gen_. on s. _fluently,
skilfully_: _offspring_? #PPs# 103^16. [spōwan]

±spēdan w. d. _to prosper, succeed_, _Ma_. [‘_speed_’]

spēddropa m. _useful drop (ink)_, #Rd# 27^8.

spediende _suffering from_ ‘sped,’ WW.

spēdig _lucky, prosperous, rich_, AO: _plenteous, abundant_: _powerful_.

+spēdiglīce adv. _prosperously_, #LPs# 44^5.

spēdignes f. _opulence_, OEG 3605.

spēdlīce adv. _effectually, effectively_, #PPs#.

+spēdsumian _to prosper_, OEG 3630.

spēdum v. sped.

spel == spell

spelc m? _splint_, _Lcd_. [‘_spelk_’]

spelcan _to fasten with splints_, _Lcd_. [‘_spelk_’]

speld n., nap. speld, speldru _ember, torch_, _OEG, WW_. [‘_speld_’]

+spelia m. _substitute, representation, deputy_.

spelian _to be substitute for, represent_, _Æ, RB_. [‘_spele_’]

speliend m. _substitute, representative_, Æ.

speling f. _deputyship_, RB 10^12.

spell n. _narrative, history, story, fable_, _Æ, B, Bo, Da_; AO, CP:
_speech, discourse, homily_, _B, Bo, Lcd_; CP: _message, news_:
_statement, observation_. [‘_spell_’ and v. Mdf]

spellbōc f. _book of sermons_, TC 430^21.

spellboda m. _messenger, ambassador, angel_: _speaker_: _prophet_.
[beodan]

spellcwide m. _historical narrative_, AO 100^12.

±spellian _to speak, discourse, talk_, _Bo, Lcd, LkL_; Æ: _announce,
relate, proclaim_, #Bl#: _conspire_, GD 106^1. [‘_spell_’]

spellung f. _speech, conversation, narrative, discourse_, Æ.

spelt I. m. _‘spelt,’ corn_, WW. [L.] II. _‘planca,’ board of a book_,
_WW_ 164. [‘_spelt_’]

spelter (#Lcd# 3·136) = spaldur

spēn? m. _fibre_, WW 403^17.

-spendan v. ā-, for-s.

spendung f. ‘_spending_’, _ÆH_ 556^29.

spēnn (= spēonn) pret. 3 sg. of spannan.

spennels m. _clasp_, WW 238^34.

spenst pres. 2 sg., spenð pres. 3 sg. of spanan.

speoft (MkR 8^23; MtL 27^30) redupl. pret. of *spatan? _to spit_.
[v. ES 38·28f.]

+speoftian _to spit upon_, LkL 18^32. [ES 38·34]

spēon pret. 3 sg. of spanan, spannan.

speoru (#Gl#) nap. of spere.

speorulīra = spærlīra

spēow pret. 3 sg. of spōwan.

spēow- = spīw-

sper- = spær-, spear-, spyr-

spere n., nap. spe(o)ru _‘spear,’ javelin, lance_, _Æ, AO, CP, Cp_:
_stitcking pain_, #Lcd# 175a.

sperebrōga m. _terror at spears_, #Rd# 18^4.

sperehand f. _male line (of descent)_, BC 3·340^19.

sperehealf f. _male line of descent_, TC 491^20.

sperelēas _without a (spear)-head_, WW 143^7.

sperenīð n. _battle_, #Gen# 2059.

speresceaft (æ^3) m. ‘_spear-shaft_’, _GD_ 14^27.

sperewyrt (speru-) f. _‘spearwort,’ elecampane_, _Lcd, WW_.

+sperod _armed with a spear_.

spic n. _fat bacon_, Æ. [_Ger._ speck]

spīce f. spīca m. _aromatic herb, spice_? [_L._ species]

spichūs n. _larder_.

spīcing m. _spike, nail_, ANS 125^51.

spicmāse f. _titmouse_, WW 286^15.

spīdenwiht (i?) ‘_spider_,’ _Lcd_ 167b.

spigettan _to spit_, Æ.

spilæg _‘spilagius,’ a kind of snake_, DR 125^15.

spilc == spelc

spild m. _annihilation, ruin_, CP.

spildan _to waste, ruin, destroy_.

spildsīð m. _destructive expedition_, #Ex# 153.

spilian _to sport, play_, _LL, W_. [‘_spile_’]

±spillan _to destroy, mutilate, kill_, _Lk, JnL_: _waste_, _DR_: (late)
_‘spill’ (blood)_.

spillere m. _parasite_, OEG 679.

spilling f. _waste_, #Chr# 999#e#.

spilð (GL) = spild

spind sb. fat, WW.

spindel = sprindel

spinel f. gs. spinle ‘_spindle_’, _A, Cp_.

spinelhealf (nl) f. _female line (of descent)_, TC 491^21.

spinge = spynge

spinil, spinl == spinel

-spinn v. in-s.

spinnan^3 _to ‘spin,’_ _Æ, Cp, Lcd, Mt_: _twist, writhe_, Æ.

spīr _spike, blade_, #Lcd# 99b.

spircend (y) _sputtering_, Æ: _sparkling_.

spircing (y) _sprinkling_.

spitel m. _small spade, dibble_, GD 201^20.

spittan _to dig in with a spud_, LL 454[10].

±spittan _to ‘spit,’_ _LkR, MtR, MkL_.

spittian _to spit (for cooking)_.

spitu f. _‘spit’ (cooking)_, _Æ, HL_.

spīwan^1 _to spit, spit out_, _‘spew,’ vomit_, _Æ, Bl, Chr, CP_.

spīwdrenc (i^2) m. _liquid emetic_, #Lcd#.

spiwe m. _vomiting_, #Lcd# 22b.

spiwedrenc = spīwdrenc

spīwere m. _one who spews_, WW 108^4. [‘_spewer_’]

spiweða = spiwða

spiwian (io) _to spew, spit up_ (w. d.).

spiwol _emetic_, #Lcd#.

spiwða (eo) m. _vomiting, vomit_, Æ.

spiwung (eo) f. ‘_spewing_,’ _WW_.

splātan? _to split_, v. ES 49·156.

splin = spinl  [[under “spinil”]]

splott m. _spot, blot_: _patch (of land)_, Æ.

+splottod _spotted_, TC 537^33.

spōn I. m. _sliver, chip, shaving_, _BH, Cp, Lcd_. [‘_spoon_’] II. pret.
3 sg. of spanan.

+spon = +span

spong = spang

sponge f. ‘_sponge_,’ _Mt_.

sponn == spann

spor n. _spoor, track, trail, footprint_, CP: _trace, vestige_. [_Ger._
spur]

spor- = spur-

sporettan^1 _to kick_, CVHy 6^15.

sporettung (sport-) f. _kicking_, EHy 6^15.

spornettan _to spurn, kick_, WW.

sporning f. _stumbling-block_, #Sc# 134^5.

sporu m. _spur_.

sporwrecel? m. _what is tracked after being driven off_? (BT), TC
172^26.

±spōwan^7 _to succeed, thrive_, Æ, AO, CP: (impers.) _profit, avail,
help_, Æ.

spōwendlīce adv. _prosperously_.

spracen n. _berry-bearing alder_.

spræc I. n. _shoot, slip_, WW 44^29. II. pret. 3 sg. of sprecan.

sprǣc (ē) f. _language_, _Æ, Bo, Mt_: _power of ‘speech,’_ _Lcd, LL_:
_statement, narrative, fable, discourse, conversation_, _Æ, Bl, CP,
LPs_: _eloquence_, Æ: _report, rumour_, _Lk_: _decision, judgment_:
_charge, suit_, _CP, PPs, TC_: _point, question_: _place for speaking_,
NG (ē).

spræcan = sprecan

sprǣccyn n. _mode of speech_, BH 486^1.

+sprǣce _eloquent, affable_.

+sprǣcelic _incapable of being used alone (of the inseparable
prepositions)_, #ÆGr#.

sprǣcful _talkative_, #LPs# 139^12.

sprǣchūs n. _senate-house, curia_: _auditorium_, _WW_; ÆL.
[‘_speech-house_’]

sprǣcon pret. pl. of sprecan.

sprǣdan _to spread_: (+) _stretch forth, extend_.

sprǣdung f. _propagation_, DR 109^2.

sprængan = sprengan

spranc == sprang

spranca m. _shoot, slip, branch_, _Gl_. [‘_spronk_’]

sprang pret. 3 sg. of springan.

sprangettan _to quiver_, MP 1·610; WW 473^2.

sprēawlian _to ‘sprawl,’ move convulsively_, _GPH_ 392^10.

+sprec n. _faculty of speech_: _talk, discussion_.

sprēc = sprǣc

±spreca m. _spokesman, councillor_, Æ.

±sprecan^1 _to ‘speak,’ say, utter, make a speech_, _AO, B, Bo, CP, G,
etc._: _converse, converse with_, _B, Bl_: _declare, tell of_, _LPs_:
(+) _agree_, AO. sp. on _lay claim to_.

+sprecendlic (spec-) _that should be spoken_, #Sc# 123^2.

sprēcern n. _place for speaking_, NG. [sprǣc, ærn]

sprecolnes (spec-) f. _loquacity_, #Sc# 170^15.

sprecul _talkative_, #SPs# 139^12.

sprengan (æ) (±) _to scatter, strew, sprinkle, sow_, _Æ, LL_. sp. on
_administer a clyster_: _spring, break, burst, split_. [causative of
springan; ‘_sprenge_’]

sprēot m. _pole, pike, spear_, _Cp, TC, WW_. [‘_sprit_’]

spretting = sprytting

spreulian (OEG 50^34) = sprēawlian

spreut (#Gl#) = sprēot

spricð pres. 3 sg. of sprecan.

sprincel m. _basket-snare (for catching fish)_, WW (v. ES 43·322; FM
200).

sprind _vigorous, strong_, _OEG, Sol_. [‘_sprind_’; springan]

sprindel m? _tenter-hook_, #Gl#.

-sprindlad v. ā-s.

sprindlīce adv. _vigorously_, OEG 738.

spring m. _‘spring,’ source_, _BC_ (y): _sprinkling_: _ulcer_: _flux_.

±springan^3 _to jump, leap_, _‘spring,’ burst forth, rise_, _B, Bo, Ma_;
Æ: _spread, be diffused, grow_, _Æ, Bo, MtL_.

springd = sprind

springwyrt f. _caper-plant_, #Lcd#.

+sprintan _to emit, utter_, JnL p187^12.

spritting = sprytting

sprot n., sprota m. _sprout, twig_, _OEG, WW_: _peg_. [‘_sprote_’]

sprott m. _sprat_, _ÆL, NC_. [‘_sprot_’]

sprungen pp., sprungon pret. pl. of springan.

-sprūtan v. ā-, geond-s.

sprycð pres. 3 sg. of sprecan.

spryng = spring

sprȳtan = spryttan

sprytle f. _chip_, BH 204^56 (v.l.).

spryttan _to sprout, come forth, spring, germinate, yield fruit_, _BH,
Lcd_; Æ: _incite_. [‘_sprit_’]

sprytting (e, i) f. _shoot, sprout_.

spunnen pp., spunnon pret. pl. of spinnan.

spura m. _spur_, Æ.

-spure v. fōt-, hēl-s.

spurleðer n. _spur-strap_, WW 97^10.

±spurnan^3 (o) _to strike against, kick_, _‘spurn,’ reject_, _Æ, PPs_.

spurnere (o) m. _fuller_, #ÆGr# 35^2.

spurul (= *spurnul?) _given to kicking or trampling_? OET.

spylian v. ā-s.

spynge (i), spyncge f. _sponge_, AO. [_L._ spongia]

spyrc- = spirc-

spyrd m. _‘stadium,’ race-course_, NG.

spyremann (e^1) m. _tracker_, TC 172.

±spyrian (i) _to make a track, go, pursue, travel, journey_, CP: _follow
out, inquire into, ask about, investigate_, _BH, Bo_. [‘_speer_’; spor]

spyrigend m. _investigator, inquirer_.

spyriung = spyrung

spyrran (e; = ie) _to strike_, GPH.

spyrring f. _striking_, OEG.

spyrte (e, i) f. _wicker basket, eel-basket_. [_L._ sporta]

spyrung f. _asking, investigation_, OEG 5214.

staca m. _pin, ‘stake,’_ _AO, Lcd_; Æ.

stacan (stagan) _to pierce with a stake, spit_ (or? _roast_, ES 40·242),
IM 124^71.

stacung f. _the piercing of an effigy by a_ ‘staca’ (_a method of injury
by witchcraft_), LL.

stæde- = stede-

stæf m., nap. stafas _‘staff,’ stick, rod_, _Æ, Bo, Cp, LPs, CP_:
_pastoral staff_: (often in pl.) _letter, character, writing_, _Æ, Bo,
WW_: _document_: (in pl.) _letters, literature, learning_.

stæfad = stafod

stæfcræft m. _grammar_, Æ: (in pl.) _learning_, BH.

stæfcræftig _lettered_, OEG.

stæfcyst f. _letters, learning from books_, Æ.

stæfgefēg n. _syllable_: _letters_, #LSPs# 70^15.

+stæflǣred _instructed, lettered_, #Lcd#.

stæfleahtor m. _grammatical fault_, OEG 5467.

stæfleornere m. _student_, OEG 3126.

stæflic _literary_: _literal_, _Æ_. [‘_staffly_’]

stæfliðere f. _sling, ‘balista.’_

stæfn == stefn

stæfplega m. _literary game_, #Gl#.

stæfrǣw f. _row of letters, line of writing_, ÆL 23b^767: _alphabet_, BH
484^27.

stæfsweord n. _‘dolon,’ lance_? _javelin_? _WW_. [‘_staffsword_’]

stæfwīs (e) _lettered, learned_, #Lcd#.

stæfwrītere = stærwrītere  [[headword spelled “stǣrwrītere”]]

stæg n. I. _‘stay’ (rope)_, _WW_ 288^24. II. _pool, pond_. [_L._
stagnum]

stǣgel _steep_. [stīgan]

stǣger f. _‘stair,’ staircase_, _Æ, WW_. [stīgan]

stǣgl = stǣgel

stæl I. n. _place, spot_. on stale _in place of, instead of_. on stale
bēon _stand in (good) stead, be a help to_, AO 232^23: _situation,
condition_. [_Ger._ stelle] II. pret. 3 sg. of stelan.

stǣl = staðol

stæla = stela

±stǣlan _to found, institute, carry on_. synne st. _to institute sin_,
i.e. _enter on a conflict_, #Men# 287: (w. d.) _put upon, impute to,
accuse of, charge with_: (†)_avenge_. [= *stæðlian = staðolian]

stæle = stale ds. of stalu.

stǣlg = stǣgel

stælgiest m. _thievish stranger_, #Rd# 48^5.

stælherige m. _predatory army_, CP. [stelan]

stælhrān m. _decoy-reindeer_, AO 18^11.

stæll = steall

stællan (A) = stiellan

+stællan _to stall, stable_, MH 20^1.

stǣlon pret. pl. of stelan.

stæltīhtle f. _charge of stealing_, LL.

stælðing n. _theft_, NC 323. [stelan]

stǣlwierðe _serviceable_, _CP, Chr, Shr_. [staðol; ‘_stalworth_’]

stælwyrt f. _water-starwort_, WW 299^5.

stǣn- = stǣnen-, stān-

stǣna m. _pitcher, jug_, WW 415^18. [stān]

stǣnan (±) _to stone_, Æ, CP: _adorn with precious stones_, #El# 151.
[stān]

stænc == stenc

stǣnen _made of stone, stony_, Æ, AO, CP. [stān]

stǣner _stony ground_, NG.

stæng = steng

stǣnilic _stony_, #Lcd# 1·216^20.

stǣning f. _stoning_, Æ.

stæpe (e) m. usu. nap. stapas (stæpan, #RPs# 139^5) _going, gait_,
_‘step,’ pace_, Æ, CP: _power of locomotion_: _step, stair_, Æ:
_pedestal_: _grade, degree_, Æ. in stæpe _instantly_.

stæpmǣlum adv. _step by step, by degrees, gradually_, CP.

stæpp- = stepp-

stæpð pres. 3 sg. of steppan.

stær m., nap. staras _starling_, _Cp, MtL_. [‘_stare_’]

stǣr (ē) n. _story, history, narrative_. [v. A 37·56]

stærblind _stone-blind_, _Cp_. [‘_stareblind_’]

stærcedferhð = stercedferhð

stæreblind (_Shr_) = stærblind

stǣrleornere? m. _student of history_, v. OEG 4145n.

stǣrlīce adv. _accurately_, OEG 2^310.

stærling m. ‘_starling_,’ _ZDA_ 33·241^54.

stærn = stearn

stǣrtractere m. _commentator, historian_, WW 207^1.

stǣrwrītere m. _historian_, AO.

stæð n. occl. gds. staðe, nap. staðas _shore, river-bank_, Æ, AO, CP.
[‘_staith_’]

stæðfæst _firm, stable_, #Cr# 981.

stæðhlȳpe I. (ē) _sloping, precipitous_. II. f. _a steep place_, GD
95^16.

stæðhlȳplīce adv. _steeply_, #Bl# 207^20.

stæðswealwe f. _sand-martin_.

stæððan _to support_, #Rd# 4^74.

±stæððig _staid, serious_, Æ.

±stæððignes f. _staidness, seriousness_, Æ, CP.

stæðweall m. _barrier of the shore_, #Gen# 1376.

stæðwyrt f. _a plant_, #Lcd# 29a.

stafas nap. of stæf.

stafian _to dictate_, Æ.

stafod _striped_, Ep (e), Erf (æ).

stāg pret. 3 sg. of stīgan.

stagan = stacan?

stagga m. _stag_, LL 624[24]. [_ON._; v. ‘_stag_’]

stāh pret. 3 sg. of stīgan.

+stal n. _plaint, accusation_, MF 163: _contention_, GD 329^15:
_opposition_, W 186^17.

stal = steall

+stala m. _accessory in theft_, LL 100[25,1].

stalað = staðol

stald = steald

stale v. stæl.

stālern n. _court of law_, WW.

staleð- = staðol-

stalgong m. _stealthy going_, #Gu# 1113.

stalian _to go stealthily_, AO: (±) _steal_, Æ.

stālian _to confirm, strengthen_. [= staðolian]

stall == steall

stalu I. (±) f. _stealing, robbery, theft_, _Bl, MtL_; Æ: _stolen
article_: _fine for stealing_. [‘_stale_’] II. _‘stale’ (wood to which
harp-strings are fixed)_, _WW_ 203^33.

stalung f. _stealing, robbery_, AO.

stam (o) _stammering_, #Gl#.

stamerian (omr-) _to ‘stammer,’_ _GPH, HL_.

stammetan _to stammer_, WW 447^30 (o).

stamor _stammering_, #Gl#.

stān m. (and n. in NG) _‘stone,’ rock_, Æ, CP; Mdf.

stānæx f. _stone-workers’ axe_? WW.

stānbæð n. _vapour bath made by the help of heated stones on to which
water was poured_ (BT), #Lcd#.

stānbeorg m. _rocky elevation_.

stānberende _stony_, WW 427^36.

stānbill n. _tool for working stone_, WW 447^33.

stānboga † m. _rocky arch_.

stānbrycg f. _stone bridge_.

stānbucca m. _mountain goat_, #ÆGr# 68^5.

stānburg f. _town or fort of stone_, #Gen#; Mdf.

stanc I. pret. 3 sg. of stincan. II. sb. _sprinkling_, WW.

stāncarr m. _rock_, DR 19^11.

stānceastel (i^2) m. _chestnut-tree_.

stānceosel (i^2, y^2) m. _sand_, OEG.

stān-clif n., nap. -clifu, -cleofu (B) _rock, cliff, crag_, GD.

stānclūd m. _rock_, Æ, CP.

stāncræftiga m. _clever stone-worker_.

stancrian _to sprinkle_, WW 162^46.

stāncropp m. _stone-crop (plant)_, #Lcd#.

stāncynn n. _kind of stone_, ZDA 34·233.

stāncysel = stānceosel

stān-cyst, -cysten _chestnut-tree_. [_L._ castanea]

stand (o) m. _delay_, _MkLR_ 6^35. [v. ‘_stand_’]

±standan^6 (o) _to ‘stand,’ (‘i-stand’) occupy a place, stand firm_, _B,
Bl, VPs_; Æ, AO, CP: _remain, continue, abide_, _G_; AO, CP: _stand
good, be valid, be, exist, take place_, Æ, CP: _oppose, resist_: _stand
still, stop_, Æ: (†) _appear, flash out_, _B_: _arise, come_, W: (†) _be
present to, come upon (of fear)_. ne s. tō ahte _be of no account_, W
82n. s. on _consist_: (+) _stand up, keep one’s feet_, _Bo_: (+)
_attack, assail_, ÆL: (+) _perform_.

stāneht = stānihte  [[headword spelled “stāniht”]]

stānex = stānæx

stān-fæt n., nap. -fatu _stone vessel_.

stānfāh † _stone-paven_.

stānflōr m. _paving-stone, tessella_, OEG 14^3. [cp. flōrstān]

stang pret. 3 sg. of stingan.

stāngaderung f. _stone wall_, #ERPs# 61^3.

stāngeat n. _opening between rocks_, Ct.

stāngefeall n. _heap of stones_, MH 212^21.

stāngefōg n. _stone-laying_, #El# 1021.

stāngella (i^2) m. _‘staniel,’ pelican_, _VPs, WW_.

stāngetimbre n. _stone-work, masonry_, WW 441^6.

stāngeweorc n. _art of building_: _stone-work, masonry_, Æ.

stān-gripe m., dp. -greopum _handful of stones_? #El# 824.

stānhege m. _stone fence, wall_, #LPs# 79^13.

stānhīfet = stānhȳwet

stān-hlið † n., nap. -hliðu, -hleoðu _rocky slope, cliff, rock_.

stānhof n. _stone building_, #Ruin# 39.

stānhol n. _hole in a rock_.

stānhricg m. _rocky ridge_, OEG 5465.

stānhȳpe f. _stone-heap_, KC 3·431^9.

stānhȳwet n. _stone quarry_.

stānig (æ) _stony, rocky_, AO.

stāniht (æ) I. adj. _stony, rocky_, AO. II. n. _stony ground_.

stānincel n. _little stone_, A 13·31^86.

stānlesung f. _building with loose stones_, WW 117^34. [lesan]

stānlīm m. _cement, mortar_, WW 205^9.

stānmerce m. _parsley_, WW.

stānrocc m. _high rock, obelisk_, #Gl#.

stānscalu f. _shale_, EC 306^18.

stānscræf n. _rocky cave_.

stānscylf m. _rugged rock_, #HGl# 449.

stānscylig _shaly, stony_. [sciell]

stānsticce n. _bit of stone_, WW 376^18.

stānstrǣt f. _paved road_, TC 525^21.

stāntorr m. _stone tower_: _crag, rock_, GD 12.

stānweall m. _stone wall_, Æ.

stānweg m. _paved road_, BC 1·417.

stānweorc n. _stone structure_, Æ.

stānwong m. _stony plain_, #Rd# 88^6.

stānwurma m. _mineral colour_, OEG 1061.

stānwurðung f. _worship of stones_, LL.

stānwyrht? f. _stone structure_, WW 341^10.

stānwyrhta m. _stone-mason_, #Gl#.

stapa m. _grasshopper, locust_, WW.

stapas v. stæpe.

stapel = stapol

stapela m. _post, stake_, LL 387[4,2].

stapen pp. of steppan.

stapol m., nap. stapolas, staplas _basis, trunk of a tree, post, prop,
support, stay, pillar, column_, _An, MtL, WW_: _threshold_? _B_ 926:
_market and court_, EC 466. [‘_staple_’; v. Mdf]

stapolweg m. _staked-out road_? KC 5·281^23.

-stapplian v. under-s.

stapul = stapol

staras v. stær.

starc = stearc

stareblind = stærblind

±starian _to ‘stare,’ gaze_, _ÆL, B_.

stað- v. stæð.

staðel == staðol

staðol (ea^1, e^2, u^2) m. _base, foundation, support_, _BH, WW_; AO,
CP: _station, position, state, condition_, CP: _stability, security_:
_firmament, heavens_: _underside of a turf_, _Lcd_. [‘_staddle_’;
standan]

staðolǣht f. _real estate_, #Rim# 22.

staðolfæst _fixed, firm, steadfast_, _Bo, MtL_. [‘_stathelfast_’]

staðolfæstlic _steadfast, firm_, Æ. adv. -līce.

staðolfæstnes (ea) f. _stability_.

+staðol-fæstnian, -festian _to make firm, establish_.

staðolfæstnung f. _foundation_, #LPs# 136^7.

±staðolian (e^2) _to fix, establish_, _Bl_: _confirm, make steadfast_.
[‘_stathel_’]

+staðoliend m. _founder_, #LPs# 47^2 (e^2).

staðolung f. _foundation, settlement_.

staðolwang † m. _settling place_.

staðul = staðol

steaf- = stæf-

stealc † _lofty, steep, precipitous_.

-stealcian v. be-s.

stealcung f. _act of going stealthily_, _Æ_. [‘_stalking_’]

steald pret. 3 sg. of stellan.

+steald † n. _dwelling, habitation_.

stealdan^7 † _to possess, own_.

steall (a) mn. _standing, place, position, state_, _WW_: _‘stall’ (for
cattle), stable_, _Cp_; Æ: _fishing ground_.

+steall † n. _structure, frame_.

-stealla v. eaxl-, hand-, ofer-s.  [[error for “handgestealla”?]]

steallere (a) m. _marshal, constable_.

-steallian v. forð-s.

  [[Cross-referenced word could not be identified.]]

stēam (ē, īe) m. _‘steam,’ vapour, moisture, exhalation_, Æ: _steaming
fluid, blood_, #Rood# 62.

stēap I. _‘steep,’ precipitous, deep_: _high, lofty, prominent,
projecting_, Æ: _upright_? B 2566. II. (ēo) m. _‘stoup,’ beaker,
flagon_.

stēap- = stēop-

stēapes adv. _high_.

stēaphēah _very high_, #Rd# 26^4.

stēapol m. _cairn_? Ct.

stearc (a) _stiff, rigid, obstinate_, _Æ, El_: _stern, severe, hard_,
_Æ_: _harsh, rough, strong, violent, impetuous_, _WW_. [‘_stark_’]

stearcferð _harsh, stern_, #Jul# 636.

stearcheard _excessive_, DD 200?

stearcheort † _stout-hearted_.

stearcian _to stiffen, become hard_, _GPH_ 402^56. [‘_stark_’]

stearclīce adv. _stoutly, strongly, vigorously_, _Chr_ 1016#d#.
[‘_starkly_’]

stearcmōd _stubborn_, NC 323.

stearn (æ, e) m. _sea-swallow_? _tern_?

stearra (DR) = steorra

steartlian _to kick, struggle_, _OEG_. [‘_startle_’]

stea-ðel, -ðul = staðol

steb = stybb

stebn (#Gl#) = stefn

stēda m. _stud-horse, stallion_, Æ: _entire camel_. [‘_steed_’]

stede m. _place, site, position, station_, _Æ, Bo, Ct, Lcd, RB_; CP;
Mdf: _firmness, steadfastness, fixity_, Æ: _strangury_. of s.
_immediately_. [standan; ‘_stead_’]

stedefæst _‘steadfast,’ firm_, ÆL.

stedefæstnes (styd-) f. _constancy_, DR 50^2.

+stedegian _to stand still_, ÆL 31^242.

stedeheard † _firm, strong_.

stedelēas _unsteady, unstable_, Æ.

stedewang † m. _field, plain_.

stedewist f. _steadiness_, #HGl# 530^4.

+stēdhors n. _stud-horse, stallion_.

stedig _sterile_, Æ.

stedignes f. _sterility_, #ERSPs# 34^12.

stedinglīne f. _stay (ship’s rope)_, WW.

stef- = stæf-, staf-

stefen = stefn I.

stefn (æ) I. f. _voice, sound_, Æ, CP. II. m. _message, summons, turn
(of military service)_, _time_. nīwan stefne _anew, again_: _a body of
men who take a turn at work, the English military force_? (BT), KC
5·121. III. m. _‘stem,’ trunk_: _foundation, root_: _prow or stern of a
vessel_. [stæf; _Ger._ stamm]

stefna † (æ) m. _prow or stern of a ship_.

stefnan I. (±) _to institute, arrange, regulate_: _alternate_. II. (+)
_to provide with a fringe_, CM 288.

stefnbyrd f. _control_, #Creat# 45.

stefnelof n. ‘_vociferatio_,’ #LPs# 26^6.

stefnian (w. d.) _to summon_: (+) _determine, settle_, MFH 162.

stela (æ, eo) m. _stalk_: _support_, Æ.

±stelan^4 _to ‘steal,’ rob_.

stēle (#Gl#) = stȳle

stellan I. (y) _to place, put, set_, AO, CP. +stelled bēon mid _have an
attack of_, GD. [steall] II. = stiellan

stelmēle m. _handled vessel_, A 9·264^11.

stelscofl (eo^1) f. _shovel with (long) handle_? GPH 400^498.

stelð pres. 3 sg. of stelan.

stēm = stēam

stēm- = stīem-

steming = stemning

stemmǣlum _alternately_, CM 280. [stefn II.]

stemn (CP) = stefn

stemnettan _to stand firm_, #Ma# 122.

stemning f. _border, hem_: _turn, shift_.

stempan _to pound_, #Lcd# 1·378^18.

stempingīsern n. _stamping-iron_, WW.

+sten (æ) n. _groaning_, #PPs# 30^11.

stenan _to groan_, #PPs# 37^9.

stēnan = stǣnan

stenc m. _odour, scent, fragrance_, Æ, CP: _stench, stink_, Æ, AO.
[stincan]

stencan _to scatter_: _afflict_? #PPs# 43^3.

stencbǣre _stinking_, BH 48^17.

stencbrengende _odoriferous_, DR 77^19.

+stence (æ) _odoriferous_, #Lcd# 1·282^19.

stencfæt n., pl. -fatu _perfume-casket_, OEG 8^239.

±stencnes f. _odour_.

stenecian _to pant_, OEG 6^5. [stenan]

steng m. _stake, pole, bar, rod, staff, cudgel_, CP. [stingan; v. Mdf]

stent pres. 3 sg. of standan.

steol- = stel-

stēold pret. 3 sg. of stealdan.

stēop = stēap

stēopbearn n. _orphan_, Æ.

stēopcild (ē, ēa) n. _orphan, unprotected one_.

stēopdohtor (ē) f. _step-daughter_, WW.

stēopfæder m. _step-father_, AO.

stēopmōdor f. _step-mother_, AO, CP.

stēopsunu m. _step-son_, AO.

stēor I. (ȳ) f. _steering, direction, guidance_, Æ: _rule, regulation_,
Æ: _restraint, discipline, correction_, Æ, CP: _penalty, fine,
punishment_, Æ, CP. II. m. _steer, bullock, young cow_, #Gl#.

stēora (īe, ȳ) m. _steersman, pilot, guider, director_, CP (stīora).

stēoran = stīeran

stēorbord n. ‘_starboard_,’ _AO_.

stēorend (ȳ) m. _corrector, director, ruler_.

stēorere m. _steersman_, CP 431^31.

stēoresmann = steormann

steorfa m. _pestilence_: _carrion_.

steorfan^3 _to die_, _ÆH_. [‘_starve_’]

steorglēaw _clever at astronomy_, OEG.

stēorlēas _not under control or rule, wild, profligate, foolish_.

stēorlēaslic _unmanageable_, GD 289^10.

steormann m. _pilot, master of a ship_, Æ.

steornægl m. _handle of a helm_, WW 312^4?

steornede _having a bold forehead_? WW. [cp. _Ger._ stirn]

stēoroxa m. _steer_, WW 120^26.

steorra m. ‘_star_,’ _Chr, Lcd, VPs_.

stēorrēðra m. _steersman, master of a ship_.

stēor-rōðer, -rōðor n. ‘_rudder_,’ _Cp_; CP.

steorscēawere m. _astronomer, astrologer_, WW.

stēorsceofol f. _rudder_, WW.

stēorsetl n. _steersman’s seat, after part of a ship_, Æ.

stēorsprec _reproof_, #RPs# 37^15.

stēorstefn m. _stern (of ship)_, WW 482^15.

steort (e) sm. _tail_, _Cp, Bo_: _spit of land, cape_: _plough-tail_.
[‘_start_’]

stēor-weorð, -wierðe _blameworthy, reprehensible_, CP 194, 195^3.

steorwigle n. _astrology_, #Gl#.

steorwīglere m. _mathematician, astrologer_, OEG 55^8.

steorwiglung f. _astrology_, A 13·33^141.

stēp- = stēop-

stēpan † I. (±) _to erect, raise_: _elevate, exalt, honour, adorn,
enrich_: (+) _help, support_. [stēap] II. (±) _to initiate,
consecrate_, WW.

stepe = stæpe

stepegong m. _stepping, going_? #Rim# 22.

stēpel = stīpel

±steppan^6 _to ‘step,’ go, advance_, Æ, CP (æ).

steppescōh (æ) m. _slipper_, WW.

stēr = stǣr

stēran I. _to burn incense_: _fumigate_. [stōr] II. = stīeran

stercedferhð † (æ) _stout of heart, determined, bold, brave_.

stēring f. _incense_, OEG 1512.

stermelda m. _informer_? _complainant_? LL 9[5]; v. 2·202.

stern = stearn

sterra (N) = steorra

stert = steort

sterung = styrung

stēða (WW) = stēda

stēup- (Ep) = stēop-

stī- = stig-

stic- = stycce-

sticādl f. _pain in the side, stitch_, WW 112^22.

sticca m. _‘stick,’ pointer_: _spoon_.

sticce I. n. _sticky matter_. II. == stycce

sticcian = stician

±stice m. _sting, prick, puncture, stab_, CP: _stitch, pain in the
side_.

sticel I. m. _prick, goad, thorn_, CP. II. = sticol

sticels (Æ) = sticel

sticfodder n. _case for spoons_? _or twigs_? LL 455[17].

stician (y) (±) tr. _to ‘stick,’ prick, stab, transfix, goad, gouge
out_, AO, CP: _kill_: intr. _stick, inhere, be placed, lie, remain
fixed, be hampered_, Æ, CP.

sticmǣlum (Æ) = styccemǣlum

stic-ol, -ul _lofty, sharp, abrupt, steep_, Æ: _arduous, rough_:
_scaly_: _biting_, GPH 417.

sticolnes f. _height_, OEG 4437.

stictǣnel m. _basket_, WW 403^2.

sticung f. _pricking, goading, stabbing_, AO.

sticwærc m. _stitch in the side_, WW 112^21.

sticwyrt f. _agrimony_, WW 136^21.

stīegan = stīgan

stiell † m. _jump, leap, spring_, #Cr#.

±stiellan (æ, e, y) _to leap, rush_.

stīem = stēam

stīeman (ē, ȳ) _to emit vapour_, _‘steam,’ exhale_. [stēam]

stīeme (ī) _fragrant_, #Lcd#.

stīeming (ē) f. _fragrance_, OEG.

stīep m. _downfall_? #Gen# 60?

-stīepan (ē, ēa, ēo, ȳ) v. ā-s.  [[under “āstȳpan”]]

stīera = stēora

±stīeran (ēo, ī, ȳ) _to ‘steer,’ guide, direct, govern, rule_, CP:
(w. d. or g.) _restrain, correct, reprove, punish_, AO, CP. [stēor]

-stierfan (æ, e, y) v. ā-s.  [[under “āstærfan”]]

stiern- = styrn-

stīernes (ȳ) f. _discipline_, Æ.

stīf _rigid, ‘stiff,’_ GPH 394. [_Ger._ steif]

stīfearh m. _little pig (kept in a sty)_, LL 449^7. [stig]

stīfian _to be or become rigid_, #ÆGr#.

stīfician (= *stȳfecian) _to extirpate, root out_, #Lcd# 3·184^17.

stīfig _steep_, BC (Mdf).

stig n. _‘sty,’ pen_: _hall_.

stīg f. _narrow path, way, footpath, track, road, course, line_, CP.
[_Ger._ steig]

±stīgan^1 _to move, go_: _go up, spring up, ascend, rise, mount, scale_,
AO, CP: _go down, descend_, Æ, CP. [_Ger._ steigen]

stige m. _ascent, descent_.

stig-el (-ol) f. ‘_stile_,’ Ct, GD 24.

stigelhamm m. _enclosure reached by a stile_, KC 5·289^2.

stīgend m. _stye (on the eye)_, WW 114^10.

stigian _to shut into a sty_.

stīgnes f. _descent_, LkL 19^37.

stigrāp m. ‘_stirrup_,’ WW.

stigu = stig

stigweard = stīweard

stigwita = stīwita

stihl = stigel

stihtan (±) _to rule, direct, arrange, order, ordain_, AO, CP: _incite,
instigate_. [_Ger._ stiften]

stihtend m. _disposer_, #Jul# 419.

stihtere m. _director, ruler_, CP 391^22; GD 221^19.

stihtian (CP) = stihtan

±stihtung f. _arrangement, direction, dispensation, providence_, AO.

stīhð pres. 3 sg. of stīgan.

stileð = stylð pres. 3 sg. of stelan.

±stillan (y) _to be still_: (w. d. or a.) _‘still,’ (‘i-still’) quiet,
calm, appease, hush_, _BH, Gen_.

stille _‘still,’ quiet, calm, stable, fixed_: _gentle_, Æ, CP: _silent_,
Æ: _secret_.

stilles = stilnes

stillīce adv. _silently_, CM 266.

stilnes (AO, CP), stillnes f. _stillness, quiet, silence_: _peace_, AO,
CP: _release, relaxation_, CP.

stīme = stīeme

stincan^3 _to emit a smell_, _‘stink,’ exhale_, AO: _sniff_, B 2289:
_rise (of dust, vapour, etc.)_, #Rd# 30^12.

+stincan^3 tr. _to smell_, CP: _have the sense of smell_, _PPs_.
[‘_i-stink_’]

sting (y) m. _‘sting,’ puncture, thrust_.

stingan^3 I. _to ‘sting,’ stab, pierce, push through, thrust_, CP. st.
on _lay claim to, usurp_. II. = stincan

stintan = styntan

stiorc = stirc

stīpel (ē, ȳ) m. _‘steeple,’ tower_, Æ. [stēap]

stīpere m. _post, prop_, WW 126^11.

+stīr = +stȳr

stir- = styr-

stīran = stīeran

stīrāp = stigrāp

stirc (io, y) n. _calf_, Æ (y).

stirgan = styrian

stitian = stihtan

stīð _stiff, thick, rigid, hard, resolute, firm, strong, brave_, Æ:
_stubborn, unrelenting, austere, strict, fierce, harsh, cruel_, Æ, CP.

stīðe I. adv. _very much, strongly, well_: _harshly, strictly, severely,
bitterly_, Æ. II. f. _name of a plant_, #Lcd# 160b.

stīðecg _stiff-edged_, #Rd# 88^14.

stīðferhð † _determined, stern_.

stīðhycgende † (-hug-) _determined, resolute, brave_: _stern,
obstinate_.

stīðhȳdig † _determined, resolute_.

stīðhygd _determined, resolute_, #Jul# 654.

+stīðian _to become hard_: _become strong, grow up, mature_, Æ.

stīðlic _firm, stout, strong, hard_: _decided_: _harsh, stern, severe_,
Æ, CP. adv. -līce.

stīðmægen n. _powerful force_, DD 114.

stīðmōd † _resolute, brave, firm, unflinching, stubborn, stern, severe_.

stīðnes f. _hardness, rigidity, strictness, severity, rigour_, Æ:
_firmness, constancy_, Æ.

stīðweg m. _rough way_, #Rd# 4^35.

stīweard m. _‘steward,’ housekeeper, guardian_. [stig-]

stīwita m. _housekeeper_? _householder_? #Gen# 2079; #Rd# 4^10.

stoc I. m. _‘stock,’ stump, stake, log_, Æ; Mdf: _trumpet_, MtL 6^2.
[_Ger._ stock] II. n. _place, house, dwelling_, GD (v. ES 37·191).

stoccen _made of logs_? KC 3·73^20.

stoclīf n. _dwelling-place, city_.

stocweard m. _citizen_, OEG 5272.

stocwīc n. _dwelling-place_, GD 172^4.

stod mf. _post_, WW 106^33.

-stod v. wealh-s.  [[headword spelled “wealhstōd”]]

stōd I. n. _‘stud’ (of horses)_, Mdf. II. pret. 3 sg. of standan.

stōdfald m. _stud-fold, paddock_, Ct.

stōdhors n. _stud-horse, stallion_, BH 138^1.

stodla m. _(weaver’s) slay_, LL 455[15,1].

stōdmyre (e^2) f. _brood-mare_, LL 58[16].

stōdon pret. pl. of standan.

stōdðēof m. _horse-stealer_, LL 54[9,2].

stofa, stofu mf. _bath-room_, #Gl#. [‘_stove_’]

stofbæð n. _vapour bath_.

stofn mf. _trunk, stem, branch, shoot_: _progeny_: _station, position_.

stōl I. m. _‘stool,’ chair, seat_, CP: _throne_: _bishop’s see_. II. n.
_long outer garment_, NG.

stole f. _stole_. [_L._]

stolen pp. of stelan.

stom == stam

stonc = stanc pret. 3 sg. of stincan.

stond == stand

stōp pret. 3 sg. of steppan.

stōpel m. _footprint_, #Bl# 127.

stoppa m. _bucket, pail_, GD, #Gl#.

-stoppian v. for-s. [‘_stop_’]

stōr I. m. _incense, frankincense_, Æ. [_L._ storax] II. _strong,
great_, #Chr# 1085. [_ON._ stōrr]

storc m. ‘_stork_,’ Æ.

stōr-cille, -cyl(le) f. _censer_, Æ.

stōrfæt n. _censer_, NC 323.

storm m. _tempest, ‘storm’_: (†) _onrush, attack, tumult,
disturbance_, CP.

stormig? _stormy_, OEG 56^291.

stōrsæp n. _resin_, OEG 4027.

stōrsticca m. _rod for stirring the incense in the censer_? (BT), EC
250.

stot m. _a kind of horse_, v. NC 323.

stōw f. _spot, site, station, locality, position_, Æ, AO, CP; Mdf;
_(holy) place_, LL.

stōwigan _to retain, restrain_, Cp 1713.

stōwlic _local, limited by space_, Æ. adv. -līce _as regards place_, Æ.

strāc pret. 3 sg. of strīcan.

strācian _to ‘stroke,’_ CP.

strācung f. _stroking_, WW 179^9.

stræc (ǣ? e) I. _firm, strict, severe, stern, rigid, obstinate, hard_,
Æ, CP: _strenuous, vehement, violent_, Æ. [streccan] II. n. _rigour_:
_violence, force_, Æ.

stræclic _strict_, CP. adv. -līce _strictly, severely, vehemently,
violently_, CP.

strǣde f. _pace_, MtL 5^41.

strǣdon pret. pl. of strēdan.

strægd pret. 3 sg. of stregdan.

strægdnes f. _aspersion_, BH 446^15.

strǣgl = strǣl II.

strǣl I. fm. _arrow, dart, missile_. [_Ger._ strahl] II. f. _curtain,
quilt, matting, bed_, #Gl#. [_L._ stragula]

strǣlbora m. _archer_, WW.

strǣle f. = strǣl I.

strǣlian _to shoot (an arrow)_, #RPs# 63^5.

strǣlwyrt f. _name of a plant_, #Lcd# 36b.

strængð (#VPs#) = strengð

strǣt I. f. _‘street,’ high road_, Æ, CP; Mdf. [_L._ strata (via)] II.
f. _bed_, #CPs#. [_L._ stratum]

strǣtlanu f. _street_, NC 323.

strand n. _‘strand,’ sea-shore_, Æ.

strang (o) comp. strengra, superl. strengest (from strenge) _‘strong,’
powerful, bold, brave_, Æ, CP: _constant, resolute, strenuous_: _strict,
severe_, CP: _arduous_: _violent_.

strange adv. comp. strangor, superl. strangost _strongly, violently,
furiously, severely_.

stranghynde _strong of hand_, Æ.

±strangian _to strengthen, confirm_, Æ, AO, CP: _be strong, prevail_,
#VPs#.

stranglic _strong, stout, firm, solid, sound, robust_, Æ: _severe_. adv.
-līce _strongly, firmly, stoutly, boldly, bravely_, Æ, CP: _fiercely,
violently_.

strangmōd _resolute_, RB 138^28.

strangnes f. _strength, power, force_.

±strangung f. _strengthening, quickening, nourishing_, Æ: _vigour_, Æ.

strapulas mp. _breeches_, WW 125^2.

strāwberige = strēawberige

strē (N), strēa = strēaw

streac = stearc

strēad pret. 3 sg. of strūdan.

streaht pp. of streccan.

strēal = strǣl

strēam m. _‘stream,’ flood, current_, AO, CP: (†) pl. _sea_.

strēamfaru f. _rush of water_, #An# 1578.

strēamgewinn n. _strife of waters_, #Rd# 4^26.

strēamlic _of water_, ÆH 1·444^10.

strēamracu f. _water-course, channel_.

strēamrād f. _course of a stream_: _sea-path_.

strēamrynes adv. _flowing like a stream_, Æ.

strēamstæð n. _shore_, #Gen# 1434.

strēamweall m. _shore_, #Gen# 1494.

strēamwelm m. _surging stream_, #An# 495.

strēaw (ē) n. _‘straw,’ hay_, Æ (ēo).

strēaw-berige, -beriewīse f. ‘_strawberry_.’

strēawian = strewian

strec (Æ) = stræc

streccan (±) _to stretch, (‘i-stretche’) spread out, prostrate_, _Lcd_:
_reach_, Æ.

streccanmōd _persistent_, ÆP 80^10.

strecednes f. _bed, couch_, #LPs#.

streclic = stræclic

strecnes f. _pertinacity_: _rigidity_, GD 345^2.

strēdan^3 (and wv.) pret. 3 sg. strēdde, pl. strǣdon. (strong), pp.
strēded, strēd [= stregdan]

+strēdd _sprinkled_, #Sc# 97^12. [stregdan]  [[from first edition]]

strēgan = stregdan

stregdan^3 (and wv.) pret. strægd, strugdon (wk. stregde), pp. strogden
(wk. stregd) _to strew, sprinkle, disperse, scatter, straggle_: _to
spread, extend_.

strēgl = strǣl II.

strehte pret. 3 sg. of streccan.

strēl = strǣl

strēn = strēowen

strēnan = strīenan

streng I. m. _‘string,’ cord, ligature, sinew_. in pl. _tackle,
rigging_: _lineage, race_. II. = strengu

+strengan _to fortify_. +strenged _formed, made_, OEG 46^8.

strenge _severe_. #Gen# 60. [v. strang]

strengel m. _ruler, chief_, B 3115. [strang]

strengest (AO, CP) v. strang.

strenglic _strong, firm_, #Gen# 273.

strengra (Æ, AO, CP) v. strang.

strengð f., strengðu f. _‘strength,’ force, vigour_: _ability,
superiority_: _firmness, fortitude_, Æ: _manhood, mature years_:
_violence_.

strengu f. _strength, power, vigour, ability_, CP: _firmness,
fortitude_, CP: virtue.

strenð (#KGl#) = strengð

strēon I. (±) n. _gain, acquisition, property, treasure_, _AO, WW_; Æ,
CP: _traffic, usury_: _procreation_, Æ. [‘_i-streon_’] II. = strēowen

strēonan = strīenan

+strēones (ēu) f. _petty gain_, GPH 389.

+strēonful _costly, valuable, precious_, Æ.

strēow == strēaw

strēowen (ē) f. _resting-place, couch, bed_.

strēowian = strewian

strēownes f. _mattress, bedding_, #Bl# 227.

strēt I. pres. 3 sg. of strēdan. II. = strǣt

strēw = strēaw

strēwen = strēowen

±strewian (ea, eo) _to ‘strew,’ scatter_, CP.

strewung f. _what one lies on_, #LPs# 131^3.

±stric n? _plague_? _strife_? _sedition_? #Lcd#, LL, W.

strica m. _stroke, line, mark_, Æ. [‘_streak_’]

strīcan^1 _to pass lightly over the surface, stroke, rub, wipe_: _move,
go, run_. [‘_strike_’]

stricel m. I. _fount, breast_, #Gl#. II. _implement for smoothing corn
in a measure_? (BT) _rope_? (ES 43·325), Cp 266#t#.

strīchrægl n. _a cloth for wiping_? CC 23^21.

+strician _to knit together, mend (nets)_, MtL 4^21.

strīdan^1 _to ‘stride,’_ #Gl#. up on s. _mount (a horse)_, GD 81^29.

stride m. _stride, step_, Cp 134#p#.

±strīenan (ēo, ī, ȳ) _to acquire, gain, amass_, CP: _beget_, AO, CP:
_increase, augment_? CP. [strēon]

+strīenendlic (e, y) _begetting_, OEG: _genitive_, #ÆGr#.

strigdeð pres. 3 sg. of stregdan.

strīman^4 _to resist, oppose_, Cp.

strīna m. _acquirer_, v. OEG 27^1.

strīnan = strīenan

strīnend m. _acquirer_, ES 39·352.

strīpan (y) v. be-s.

stripligan ‘_perfringere_’? v. OEG 46^21.

strīð † m. _strife, struggle, fight, contest, dispute, contention_.
[_OS._]

stroccian _to stroke_, NC 323.

+strod n. _plunder, robbery_: _confiscation_.

strōd n. _marshy land_ (_covered with bushes or trees_?) BC (Mdf); PST
95/98, 537.

stroden pp. of strūdan.

strogden pp. of stregdan.

±strogdnes f. _scattering, sprinkling_, DR.

strong == strang

strop _‘struppus,’ (oar)thong, strap_, WW 181^42.

strosle (GD 100^19) = ðrosle

-strowennes v. ā-s.  [[headword spelled “āstrowenes”]]

+strud (GD 162^32) = +strod

±strūdan^2 _to ravage, spoil, plunder, carry off_.

strūdend m. _robber_: _money-lender_.

strūdere m. _robber_, #Gl#.

±strūdian _to plunder_, NC 296^324.

strūdung f. _spoliation, robbery_.

strugde (NG) wk. pret. 3 sg. of stregdan.

strūta = strȳta

strūtian _to stand out stiffly_, ÆL 32^208.

strūtnian (ÆL 23^268) = scrūtnian

±strȳdan _to rob, deprive_.

+strȳdd = +strēdd

strȳdere = strȳndere

strȳn- = strīen-, strīn-

strȳnd f. _generation, line of inheritance, race, stock, tribe_.

strȳndan _to waste_, WW.

strȳndere m. _squanderer, prodigal_, WW.

+strynge m. _wrestler_, WW 465^40.

strȳta (ū) m. _ostrich_. [_L._ struthio]

stubb = stybb

stūc _heap_, ES 11·512.

studdian _to look after, be careful for_, #Kl# 17^79.

studding f. _care, trouble, labour_, #Kl# 17^63.

studu f., gs. stude, ds. styde (also indecl. in sg.), nap. styde
_column, pillar, post, buttress_. [‘_stud_’]

stufbæð n. _vapour bath_, #Lcd#. [stofa]

stulor _furtive, stealthy, stolen_, Æ. adv. -līce, Æ.

+stun n. _din, crash, whirlwind_.

stuncen, pp., stuncon pret. pl. of stincan.

stund f. _short space of time, moment, period, time_. stunde _now, at
once, from time to time_ (v. also stundum): _hour_: _signal_. [_Ger._
stunde]

+stund n. _noise_, #Guth# 36^28 (= +stun).

-stundian v. ā-s.

stundmǣlum adv. _from time to time, gradually_: _time after time,
alternately_.

stundum adv. _from time to time, at times_, Æ: _with effort,
laboriously, eagerly, fiercely_, Æ. [dp. of stund]

stungen pp., stungon pret. pl. of stingan.

stunian _to crash, resound, roar_: _impinge, dash_. [‘_stun_’]

stunra (#KGl# 69^31) = stuntra, gp. of stunt.

stunt _dull, stupid, foolish_, Æ.

stuntlic _stupid, foolish_, Æ. adv. -līce, Æ.

stuntnes f. _stupidity, folly_, Æ.

stuntscipe m. _foolishness_, Mk 7^22.

stuntsprǣc f. _silly talk_.

stuntsprǣce _talking foolishly_, W 72^17.

stuntwyrde _talking foolishly_.

stūpian _to ‘stoop,’_ AO.

sturtende (DR 57^12) = styrtende  [[form of “styrtan”]]

stūt m. _gnat_, WW.

stuðansceaft m. _prop_, AS 1^1,10.

stuðu = studu

stybb m. _stump_, Æ; Mdf. [‘_stub_’]

stycce (i) n. _piece, portion, bit, fragment_, Æ. ymbe st. _after a
short time_: _mite (small piece of money)_. [_Ger._ stück]

styccemǣlum adv. _piecemeal, little by little, by degrees, gradually_:
_to bits, to pieces_, AO: _here and there_, AO.

stycian = stician

styde I. = stede. II. v. studu.

styfecung f. _clearing_? (_land_), Ct.

styfic _a clearing in a wood_, PST 95/98, 541.

styhtan = stihtan

stȳlan _to harden, attemper_, #Cr# 679. [_Ger._ stählen]

stȳle (ē) n. ‘_steel_,’ B, #Gl#.

stȳlecg _steel-edged_, B 1533.

stȳlen † _of steel, hard as steel_.

styll = stiell

styllan I. _to make stalls for cattle_? _or to put them in stalls_? LL
454[11,13]. II. = stiellan. III. = stillan

±styltan _to be amazed, dazed, hesitate_, NG.

stylð pres. 3 sg. of stelan.

stȳman = stīeman

styng = sting

stynt = stent, pres. 3 sg. of standan.

styntan _to make dull, stupefy_, Cp 89#h#. [stunt]

stȳpel = stīpel

+styr (i) n. _stir, movement_, DR 187^5.

stȳr = stēor

styra = styria

stȳran = (1) stīeran; (2) stēran

styrc = stirc

stȳrend = stēorend

styrenes f. _power of motion, movement_: _commotion, disturbance,
tumult_: (+) _tribulation_, DR.

styrfig adj. _belonging to an animal which died of disease_, LL.
[storfe]  [[variant of “steorfa”?]]

styrfð pres. 3 sg. of steorfan.

styrgan = styrian

styria, styr(i)ga (i) m. _name of a fish, sturgeon_. [_Ger._ stör]

±styrian (i) _to ‘stir,’ move_ (tr. and intr.), _rouse, agitate, excite,
urge_, Æ, CP: _cause_: _tell, rehearse_, B 873.

styric = stirc

styrigendlic _moving_, Æ.

styrman _to storm, roar, rage, cry out, shout_.

styrne _‘stern,’ grave, strict, austere, hard, severe, cruel_.

styrnenga adv. _inexorably_, #Sol# 282.

styrnlic _hard, severe, harsh_. adv. -līce, CP (ie).

styrnmōd _stern of mood_, #Jud# 227.

styrtan _to ‘start,’ leap up_. only in pres. ptc. sturtende (=
styrtende), DR 57^12.

styrung (e) f. _moving, motion_, Æ, CP: _disturbance, commotion_, Æ:
_exercise_.

styðe ds. and nap. of stuðu = studu

sū f. _sow_. [= sugu]

suā = swā

subdīacon m. _subdeacon_, ANS 84·15.

sūcan^2 _to ‘suck,’_ _Æ, Lk, PPs, VHy_.

sucga = sugga

sucht-, suct- = suht-

sudon pret. pl. of sēoðan.

sue- = swe-

sufel, suf(o)l n. _relish eaten with bread_ (v. LL 2·754), _Jn, RB_.
[‘_sowl_’]

+sufel, sufl adj. _with a relish added to it_? (_of bread_), Ct, LL.

suflmete m. _delicacy, relish_, GD 202^26.

sūftlēre = swiftlēre

sūgan^2 _to suck, suck in_, CP.

sugga m. _a kind of bird, titlark_? _wagtail_? #Gl#.

±sugian _to be or become silent_, AO. [cp. swīgian]

sugu f. ‘_sow_,’ _Cp, CP_; Æ.

suht (y) f. _illness_, #Gen# 472.

suhterga m. _brother’s son, nephew_: _uncle’s son, cousin_.

suhtergefæderan, suhtorfædran † mp. _uncle and nephew_.

suhtriga = suhterga

sūl (Æ), sulh (AO) sfm., gs sūle(s), ds. sylg (CP), syl(h), as. sūl,
sulh; nap. sylh, syll (Æ), gp. sūla, dp. sūlum _plough_: _furrow,
gully_: _a measure of land_. [Mdf]

sulf = sufl  [[under “sufel”]]

sulfer = seolfor

sulfern (DR) = seolfren

sulhæcer m. _a strip of land for ploughing_, LL 450[9,1].

sulhælmesse f. _ecclesiastical tax on ploughed land_.

sulhandla m. _plough tail_, v. OEG 2357.

sulhbēam m. _plough tail_, WW.

sulhgang m. _the land which can be gone over by one plough in a day_, W
170^37.

sulhgesīdu np. _ploughing tackle_, LL 455^17.

sulhgetēog n. _ploughing implements_, #Lcd# 1·400^19. [cp. _Ger._
gezeug]

sulhgeweorc n. _plough-making_, #Gen# 1086.

sulhhæbbere m. _ploughman_, WW 495^19.

sulhscear n. _ploughshare_.

sūlincel n. _small furrow_, WW 348^34.

sull, suluh = sūl

sulung n. _in Kent, the fiscal unit corresponding to the hide
(or carucate in other counties)_ (NED) Ct, LL. [‘_suling_’]

sum indef. pron. (used substantively w. g.) _a certain one, some one,
something, one_, _B, Bo, G_. sixa s. _one of six_: (used adjectivally)
_a certain_, _‘some,’ any_, _Æ, AO, Bo, Bl_. sume...sume
_some...others_. hit...sum...sum... _part of it...the rest..._: (used
adverbially) _about_, _Bo, Chr, G_. s. hund _about a hundred_. sumes, s.
on dǣle _to some extent, somewhat_.

sumar, sumer == sumor

sūmnes f. _delay_, MtL 25^19. [cp. _Ger._ versäumniss]

sumor m., gs. sumeres, ds. sumera, sumere ‘_summer_,’ AO.

sumorbōc = sumorrǣdingbōc

sumorhǣte f. _summer heat_, AO.

sumorhūs n. _summer-house_, ÆL 36^98.

sumorlǣcan _to draw on towards summer_, ÆH 1·614.

sumorlang † _summer-long, of the length of a summer’s day_.

sumorlic _of summer_.

sumorlīda I. m. _summer army or expedition (one which only comes for the
summer)_, #Chr# 871. [līðan] II. (= -loda) m. _shoot, twig_, WW 450^30
(v. A 13·330).

sumormæsse f. _midsummer_.

sumorrǣdingbōc f. _summer lectionary_, TC 430^16 (e^2).

sumorselde f. _summer-house_, WW 184^1.

sumsende _swishing (of rain)_, #Rd# 4^47.

sumswēge = samswēge

sumur = sumor

sunasunu m. _son’s son, grandson_.

sunbēam mf. _sunbeam_, Æ.

sunbearu m. _sunny grove_, #Ph# 33.

sunbeorht _bright with sunshine_, #Ph# 436.

sunbryne m. _sunburn_, #Lcd#.

suncen pp., suncon pret. pl. of sincan.

sund n. _swimming_, _Æ, B, AO_: _capacity for swimming_: (†) _sea,
ocean, water_. [‘_sound_’]

+sund _sound (‘i-sound’), whole, uninjured, healthy_, _Æ, B_.

sund-būende †, -buend mp. _sea-dwellers, man, mankind_.

sundcorn n. _saxifrage_.

sundēaw _rosemary_? _sundew_? WW 301^7.

+sundelic (WW 496^24) = +syndlic  [[under “sundlic”]]

sunder == sundor

sunderanweald m. _monarchy_, ES 11·66.

sunderfolgoð m. _private office_, AO 286^5.

sunder-frēodōm, -frēols m. _privilege_, Ct.

sunderlīpes _separately, specially_, OEG 206.

sundermǣlum _separately, singly_.

sundermēd f. _private meadow_, Ct.

sunderstōw f. _special place_, #Bo# 80^2.

+sundful _sound, whole, wholesome_, Æ: _prosperous_, _Æ, Ps_.
[‘_i-sundfull_’]

+sundfullian _to prosper_, #Ps#.

+sundfullic _sound, safe, sure_. adv. -līce _safely, prosperously_, Æ.

+sundfulnes f. _health, prosperity_, Æ.

sundgebland n. _commingled sea, sea-surge, sea-wave_, B 1450.

sundgyrd (e^2) f. _sounding-rod_.

sundhelm † m. _covering of water, sea_.

sundhengest † m. _sea-horse, ship_.

sundhwæt _good at swimming_, #Whale# 57.

+sundig (y) _favourable_, BH 386^13Ca.

+sundlic (y) _prosperous_, BH: safe, GD 348^10. adv. -līce.

sundlīne f. _sounding-line, lead_, WW.

sundmere m. _swimming-bath_, WW.

sundnytt f. _exercise of the power of swimming_, B 2360.

sundor adv. _asunder, apart_: _severally_: _differently_.

sundor- v. also sunder-, synder-.

sundorcræft m. _special power or capacity_.

sundorcræftiglīce _with special skill_, BH 324^3Ca.

sundorcȳððu f. _special knowledge_, LL (322^32).

sundorfeoh n. _private property_, Ct.

sundorgecynd n. _special quality_, #Pa# 30.

sundorgenga m. _solitary (animal)_, #Bl# 199^5.

sundorgerēfland n. _land reserved to the jurisdiction of a ‘gerēfa’?_ WW
421^11.

sundorgifu f. _special gift, privilege_.

sundorhālga m. _Pharisee_, Æ.

sundorland n. _land set apart, private property_, GD, WW.

sundorlic _special_, CP 409^10. adv. -līce _apart_.

sundorlīf n. _life in seclusion_, BH 294^4.

sundormæsse f. _separate mass, special mass_, #Bk# 27´; RSL 11·486.

sundornotu f. _special office_, LL 456[2].

sundornytt f. _special use, office, or service_, CP.

sundorriht n. _special right, privilege_, WW.

sundorseld (u^2) n. _special seat, throne_.

sundorsetl n. _hermitage_, #Guth#.

sundorsprǣc f. _private conversation, private conference_, Æ, AO, CP.

sundorweorðung f. _special honour, prerogative_.

sundorwīc n. _separate dwelling_, BH 262^14.

sundorwine m. _bosom friend_, FT 29.

sundorwīs _specially wise_, #El# 588.

sundorwundor n. _special wonder_, #Mod# 2.

sundoryrfe † n. _private inheritance_.

sundplega † m. _sporting in the waves, bathing_.

sundrāp m. _sounding line, lead_, WW 358^17.

sundreced n. _sea-house, ark_, #Gen# 1335.

+sundrian † _to separate_. [‘_sunder_’]

sundrum (on) adv. _singly, separately, apart_: _continuously_, CM 211.

sundur == sundor

sundwudu † m. _(sea-wood), ship_.

suner (MtR) = sunor

sunfeld m. _Elysian fields_.

sunfolgend _‘solisequia,’ marigold_? _heliotrope_? #Gl#.

sunganges adv. _moving with the sun_, LL.

sungen pp. of (1) singan; (2) swingan.

sungihte _solstice_, MH 104^19,21.

sungon pret. pl. of singan.

sunhāt ‘_soliflua_,’ OEG 56^205.

sunlic _solar_.

sunna m. _sun_.

sunnanǣfen m. _eve of Sunday, Saturday_. [_Ger._ Sonnabend]

sunnancorn _gromel (plant)_, #Lcd# 1·314^18?

sunnandæg m. ‘_Sunday_,’ Æ.

sunnanlēoma m. _light of the sun, sunbeam_, GD 171, 172.

sunnanniht f. _Saturday night_, Æ: _Sunday_, LL 52[5,5].

sunnanscīma m. _sunshine_, MF 173.

sunnansetlgong m. _sunset_, #Chr# 773.

sunnanūhta m. _Sunday morning (early)_, _early service time_, Æ.

sunnb- = sunb-

sunne f. ‘_sun_,’ Æ, AO, CP.

sunnebēam = sunbēam

sunnon pret. pl. of sinnan.

sunnu = sunne

sunor (e^2) fn. _herd of swine_, NG.

sunsceadu f. _veil_, WW 239^19.

sunscīene _radiant_, #Jul# 229.

sunscīn _mirror_, WW 519^4.

sunset n. _west_, NG.

sunstede m. _solstice_, #Lcd#.

sunsunu? m. _grandson_, v. LL 460[11n.].

sunu m., gds. suna _‘son,’ descendant_, _Æ, B, Bl, G, VPs_: _the Son_,
_DR, G, VPs_: _young of animals_.

sunucennicge f. _mother_, DR.

sunusunu = sunsunu

sunwlitig _fair with sunshine_, #GnC# 7.

±sūpan^2 _to swallow, sip, taste_, _‘sup,’ drink_, Æ, CP: (+) _sop up,
absorb_.

sūr _‘sour,’ tart, acid_, _BC, Lcd_: _made sour, fermented_, _Lcd, WW_.

sūre f. _sorrel_.

sūr-ēagede, -ēgede, -ēge, -īge _(sour-eyed), blear-eyed_, Æ.

-sūrian v. ā-s.

sūr-milsc, -melsc, -melst adj. _half sour and half sweet (apple)_.

sūrnes f. ‘_sourness_,’ _WW_ 347^35.

sūsel == sūsl

sūsl nf. _misery, torment, torture_, Æ, AO.

sūslbona m. _devil_, #Sat# 640.

sūslcwalu (-sel-) f. _painful death_, W.

sūslhof n. _place of torment_, †Hy 10^31.

sūslstede (sel-) m. _place of torment, hell_, OEG 56^184.

suster = sweostor

sutel = sweotol

sūtere m. _shoemaker_, _Æ_. [‘_souter_’; _L._]

-sūtian v. be-s.

sutol, sutul == sweotol

sūð* I. adj. comp. sūð(er)ra, sȳðerra, superl. sūðmest _‘south,’
southern_, _AO, Bl, Cp, LkL_. II. adv. comp. sūðor, sȳð _southwards,
south_, _B, BH, Chr, Met_; AO, CP.

sūðan adv. _from the south_, CP: _on or in the south_, AO. be s.
(w. d.), wið s. (w. a.) _south of_.

sūðanēastan adv. _in or from the south-east_: _to the south-east_, AO.

sūðanēastanwind m. _south-east wind_, WW 144.

sūðanēasterne _south-eastern_, #LPs#.

Sūðanhymbre mp. _Mercians_.

sūðanweard = sūðeweard

sūðanwestan adv. _from the south-west_.

sūðanwestan-wind, -winda m. _a south-west wind_.

sūðanwind m. _south wind_.

sūðdǣl m. _southern region, the south_, _Æ, VPs_; AO. [‘_southdeal_’]

sūðduru f. _south door_, #Bl# 201^15.

sūðēast adv. _south-east_, AO.

sūðēastende m. _south-east end_, #Bo# 67^31.

sūðēasterne _south-eastern_, #ÆGr# 8^2.

Sūðengle p. _South Anglians_, _people of southern England_, LL.

sūðerige _‘satirion’ (plant)_. [_L._ satureia? cp. sæðerie]

sūðerne _‘southern,’ southerly_, _Æ, Bo, Lcd, MtL_.

sūðernewudu m. _‘abrotanum,’ southernwood, wormwood_.

sūðerra v. sūð.

sūðeweard adj. _southward, south, southern_, AO.

sūðfolc n. _southern nation or people, Suffolk_.

sūðgārsecg m. _southern ocean_, AO.

sūðgemǣre n. _southern border_, AO.

sūðheald † _inclining southwards_.

sūðhealf f. _south side_, _AO_; Æ. [‘_southhalf_’]

Sūðhymbre mpl. _Mercians_, #Chr#.

sūðland n. _southern land or shore_, _Æ, Chr_. [‘_southland_’]

sūðmǣgð f. _southern province_, BH.

sūðmann † m. _man from the south_.

sūðmest ‘_southmost_,’ _AO_.

Sūðmyrce (e) pl. _southern Mercians_, BH 238^34.

sūðor v. sūð.

sūðportic m. _south porch_, #Chr# 1036.

sūðra v. sūð.

sūðrihte (y) adv. _due south_, AO.

sūðrima m. _south coast_, #Chr#.

sūðrodor (a^2) m. _southern sky_.

Sūðsǣ mf. _south sea, sea south of England, English Channel_, Æ.

Sūð-seaxan, -seaxe pl. _South-Saxons_, _people of Sussex_: _Sussex_.

sūðstæð n. _south coast_, #Chr# 897#a#.

sūðwāg m. _south wall_, Æ.

sūðweard adv. _towards the south, southwards_, _AO, Lcd_.
[‘_southward_’]

sūðweardes adv. ‘_southwards_,’ _Met_.

sūðweg m. _southern country_, #Ex# 155.

sūðwest I. m. _the south-west_. II. adv. ‘_south-west_,’ _AO_.

sūðwesterne ‘_south-western_,’ _ApT_.

sūðwind m. _south wind_, #Ex# 289.

suwian (LWS) = sugian

swā (ǣ, ē) I. adv. and conj. (w. ind. or subj.) _so as, consequently,
just as, so far as, in such wise, in this or that way, thus, so that,
provided that_, _Æ, B, Bo_. swā swā _so as, just as, so that_. swā same
(swā) _in like manner_: _therefore, on that account_: _as, like_, _B,
Bo, Bl_: (w. comparatives) _the_. swā...swā _the...the_: _where_: _when,
so soon, as soon_: _although, unless, yet_: _if, as if_. II. pron.
_‘so,’ the same, such, that_. swā hwā swā _whosoever_. swā hwǣr swā
_wherever_. bi swā hwaðerre efes swā _on whichever side_. swā ilce =
swilce. swā selfe _in the same way_. ēac swā _also_. swā hwilc swā
_whosoever_. swā...ne _though...not_. swā...swā _whether...or_. swā ðēah
_nevertheless, yet, however_.

swāc pret. 3 sg. of swīcan.

swǣ = swā

swæc (CP), swæcc (e) m. _flavour, taste_: _smell, odour, fragrance_.

+swæccan (e) _to smell_ (tr.), DD 206; (intr.) #ARPs# 113^14.

swæcehēow ‘_insania_’? #RPs# 395^5 (v. ES 38^22).

swæf pret. 3 sg. of swefan.

swǣfan? _to burn_, #Met# 8^47.

swæfen = swefn

swæflen = sweflen

swæg == swēg

swægl = swegl

±swǣlan (tr.) _to burn_.

swælc = swilc

swǣm m. _trifler, idler_: _vain object_.

-swǣman v. ā-s.

swæncan = swencan

swǣp _enticement, persuasion, deceit_? (v. OEG 2894n).

+swǣpa (ā, ē) pl. _sweepings, rubbish_. [swāpan]

swǣpels (#VPs#) m? swǣpelse f. _robe, garment_.

swǣpig _fraudulent_, OEG 2894.

swǣr I. (ā, ē) _heavy, sad_: _oppressive, grievous_: _sluggish,
inactive, weak_. II. n. _sadness, trouble_, MF 173.

swǣrbyrd? f. _difficult birth_? #Lcd# 185a.

swǣre † (ā) _grievously, oppressively_.

+swǣre = swǣr

+swǣred _oppressed, weighed down_, #Lcd#.

swǣrlic adj. _sore, deep, heavy_, Æ.

swǣrlīce (ā) adv. _grievously, heavily_, Æ.

swǣrmōd _indolent, sluggish_, W 257.

swǣrmōdnes (ā) f. _dulness, stupidity_, CP 149^15.

swǣrnes (ā) f. _heaviness_, Æ: _sluggishness_.

swært (WW 2573^3) = sweart

±swǣs (ē) _intimate, special, favourite, dear, beloved_: _own_:
_agreeable, gentle, benevolent_: _sweet, sugary_.

+swæse _blandly, pleasantly_.

swǣsenddagas mpl. _ides (in Roman calendar)_, WW.

swǣsende (ē) n. (mostly used in pl. swǣsendu) _food, meal, dinner,
banquet, dainties_: _blandishments_.

swǣsing- = swǣsend-

±swǣslǣcan (ē^1) _to wheedle_.

swǣslic _kind, friendly, agreeable_. adv. -līce _pleasantly, kindly_:
_properly_: _plausibly_.

±swǣsnes f. _blandishment, wheedling_, Æ: _pleasure_.

swǣsung f. _lenitive, soothing application_, WW 241^24.

swǣswyrde _fair spoken_, WW 190^35.

±swǣtan _to sweat, exude_, AO: _labour, toil_, CP: _bleed_, #Cross# 20:
(+) _oppress_, #CPs# 93^5. [swāt]

swæð (e) n., nap. swaðu _footprint, track_, CP: _trace, vestige_, CP.
[cp. swaðu f.]

swæðel = sweðel

swæðelyne ‘_pinguis_,’ OEG 27^32.

swæðer pron. _whichever, whosoever_, CP. [swā, hwæðer]

+swæðian _to trace out, investigate_, #EPs# 138^3.

swæðlǣcan _to search out, visit_, CHy 9^68.

swæðorian = swaðrian, sweðrian

sweðu = swaðu

swāf pret. 3 sg. of swīfan.

swāhwætswā pron. _whatsoever_.

swāhwæðer pron. _whichever_.

swalewe = swealwe

swaloð = swoloð, sweoloð

swalwe = swealwe

swāmian _to become dark_, #Gu# 1069.

swamm (o) I. m. _fungus, mushroom_, Æ: _sponge_. [_Ger._ schwamm] II.
pret. 3 sg. of swimman.

swan (o) m. ‘_swan_.’

swān m. _herdsman, swineherd, peasant_: (†)_swain, youth, man, warrior_.

swanc pret. 3 sg. of swincan.

swancor † _slender, trim, lithe, supple_: _languishing, weak_.

swang pret. 3 sg. of swingan.

swāngerēfa m. _swineherd reeve, officer set over the depasturing of
swine in forests_, Ct.

swangettung f. _movement, agitation_, ANS 101·323.

swangor == swongor

swanrād f. _swan’s-road, sea_, B 200.

swānriht n. _law as to swineherds_, LL 449[6,1].

swānsteorra m. _evening star_, Cp 145#u#.

+swāpa = +swǣpa

±swāpan^7 _to sweep, drive, swing, rush (of wind)_. [_Ger._ schweifen]

swār == swǣr

swarc- = swearc-

-swarian (e, eo, o) v. and-s.

swarn- = sworn-

swart = sweart

swās = swǣs

swāt m? n? _‘sweat,’ perspiration, exudation_, CP: (†) _blood_: _foam_,
LkR 9^39: _toil_: _labour_, Æ.

swatan (ā?) pl. _beer_, WW.

swātclāð m. ‘_sudarium_’, _napkin_, ÆP 178^2.

swātfāh † _blood-stained, bloody_.

swātig _sweaty_, AO: (†) _gory_.

swātighlēor _with sweaty brow_, #Gen# 934 (or? two words).

swātlīn n. _napkin_, CP.

swātswaðu f. _gory track_, B 2946.

swātðyrel n. _pore of the skin_, WW 159^13.

swāðēah adv. _however, yet, nevertheless_.

swāðēahhwæðre adv. _however_, Æ.

swāðēana adv. _however_.

swaðer = swæðer

swaðian _to swathe, wrap up_, #Kl# 17^109.

swaðorian, swaðrian = sweðrian

swaðu (æ, e) f. _footstep, track, pathway_: _trace, vestige_: _scar_.
[‘_swath_’; cp. swæð]

swaðul m? _smoke_, B 782. [_Ger._ schwaden]

swē = swā

swealewe = swealwe

swealg, swealh pret. 3 sg. of swelgan.

swealt pret. 3 sg. of sweltan.

swealwe (a, o) f. ‘_swallow_.’

swearc pret. 3 sg. of sweorcan.

swearcian _to become dark_, Æ.

swearcmōdnes (a) f. _pusillanimity_, #LPs# 54^9.

swearcung (a) f. _darkness_, #RPs# 17^29.

sweard f? _hide, rind, skin_, #Gl#. [‘_sward_’]

swearm m. _‘swarm,’ multitude_.

sweart _swarthy, black, dark_, Æ: _gloomy_: _evil, infamous_.
[‘_swart_’]

swearte † adv. _miserably, evilly_.

swearthǣwen _dark-blue, purple, violet_, WW 376^24.

±sweartian _to become black_, Æ: _make black_.

sweartlāst _with black tracks_, #Rd# 27^11.

sweartnes f. _blackness, black substance_, #Gl#.

sweartung f. _darkness_, #EPs# 17^29.

swearð = sweard

±swebban _to put to sleep, lull_: (†) _kill_. [swefan]

swec (#KGl#) == swæc

swefan^5 _to sleep, slumber, rest_: (†) _sleep in death_: _cease_.

swefecere m. _sleeper_, NC 324.

swefecung f. _sleep_, NC 324.

swefed pp. of swebban.

swefel (æ) m. _sulphur_, Æ. [_Ger._ schwefel]

swefelrēc m. _sulphurous smoke_, #VPs# 10^7.

swefen == swefn

swefet = sweofot

swefeð pres. 3 sg, of swebban.

+swefian _to put to sleep, lull, appease_, Æ.

swefl = swefel

sweflen _sulphurous, of brimstone_, AO.

sweflennes (eo^1) f. _sulphurousness_, MF 123^3.

sweflenrēc (#APs#) = sweflrēc  [[headword spelled “swefelrēc”]]

sweflsweart _sulphurous_? WW 49^20.

sweflðrosm m. _sulphurous smoke_, #ERSPs# 10^7.

swefn n. (often pl.) _sleep_, Æ, AO, CP: _dream, vision_. [swebban]

swefnian (w. a. pers.) _to dream_: (w. nom. pers.) _appear in a dream_.

swefnigend m. _dreamer_, Æ.

swefnracu f. _interpretation of dreams_, LL (154^29).

swefnreccere m. _interpreter of dreams_, WW 366^12.

swefot = sweofot

swēg (ǣ) m. _sound_, Æ, AO, CP: _noise, clamour, tumult_: _melody,
harmony, tone_, Æ: _voice_: _musical instrument_: ‘_persona_,’ #Sc#.
[swōgan]

swēgan _to make a noise, sound, roar, crash_, Æ: _import, signify_, Æ.

swēgcræft m. _art of playing on an instrument, music_, #ApT# 16.

swēgdynn m. _noise, crash_, #Cr# 955.

±swēge _sonorous, harmonious_, ÆL.

swegel == swegl

swēgendlic adj. _vocal, vowel_, #ÆGr# 6^15.

sweger f. _mother-in-law_, Æ. [_Ger._ schwieger]

swēgesweard m. _organist_ (!) JGPh 1·64.

swēghlēoðor † m. _sound, melody_.

swēging f. _sound, clang, roar_.

swegl † (æ) I. n. _sky, heavens, ether_: _the sun_: _music_? II. = segl

sweglbefalden _ether-begirt_, #Sat# 588.

sweglbeorht _ether-bright, radiant_, #Gu# 1187.

sweglbōsm m. _heaven, sky_, #Gen# 9 (pl.).

sweglcondel f. _heaven’s candle, sun_, #Ph# 108.

sweglcyning † m. _King of heaven_.

swegldrēam † m. _music_. [cp. _Goth._ swiglōn]

swegle † I. adj. _bright, ether-like, clear, brilliant, splendid_. II.
adv. _clearly, brightly_.

sweglhorn m. _kind of musical instrument_, #Gl#.

swēglic _sonorous_, CM 675.

sweglrād † f. _modulation, music_.

swegltorht † _heavenly-bright_.

sweglwered (gel-) _ether-clad_, B 606.

sweglwuldor n. _heavenly glory_, #Gu# 1160.

sweglwundor n. _heavenly wonder_, #Gu# 1292.

swegr = sweger

+swegra = +swigra

+swēgsumlīce? _unanimously_, HL 18^182.

swehor (#Gl#) = swēor

sweig (#KGl# 88^4) = swēg

sweigð = swēgeð, pres. 3 sg. of swēgan.

+swel = +swell

swelan^4 _to burn, be burnt up_: _inflame (of wound)_.

swelc (AO, CP) = swilc. [v. ‘_such_’]

swelca m. _pustule_, WW 112^17.

swelce = swilce

+swelg n. _abyss_, OEG.

±swelgan^3 _to ‘swallow,’ incorporate, absorb, imbibe, devour_. [_Ger._
schwelgen]

swelgend (y) fmn. (±) _whirlpool, vortex, gulf, abyss_, CP:
_gormandiser, glutton, drunkard, debauchee_, AO.

swelgendnes f. _whirlpool_, WW 373^2.

swelgere m. _glutton_, WW 102^15.

swelgnes f. _whirlpool_, WW 510^18.

swelhð = swelgð pres. 3 sg. of swelgan.

sweliend = swelgend

+swell n. _swelling, tumour, boil_, Æ.

±swellan^3 _to ‘swell.’_

swelling f. _swelling_, #El# 245.

±sweltan^3 (i, y) _to die, perish_, Æ, AO, CP.

sweltendlic _about to die_.

-swemman v. be-s.

±swenc m. _trouble, tribulation, toil_: (+) _temptation_, #LkL# 22^46.

±swencan (æ) _to vex, distress, trouble, afflict, torment, oppress_, Æ,
CP. [causative of swincan]

+swencednes f. _trouble, affliction_, Æ.

sweng m. _stroke, blow, cut, thrust_. [swingan]

swengan _to swing, rush, fly out_. [‘_swinge_’; causative of swingan]

sweocol (CP) = swicol

sweofl- = swefl-

sweofot (e) n. _sleep_.

swēogian = swīgian

sweolce = swilce

Swēoland n. _Sweden_, AO 19^2.

sweoloð (a, o) m. _burning heat, glow, fire, flame_. [swelan]

sweoloðhāt ‘_squalidus_,’ OEG 56^202 (o^1).

sweolung? f. _inflammation_, #Lcd# 76b (sweop-).

Swēon pl. _Swedes_.

swēop pret. 3 sg. of swāpan.

sweop- = swip-

sweopung v. sweolung.

swēor I. (ē, ȳ) mf. _pillar, column, prop_, _CP_: _bolt, bar_, ES
37·183. II. m. father-in-law, Æ, AO, CP: (±) _cousin_. [_Ger._ schwäher]
III. = swōr pret. of swerian.

swēora (ī, īo, ū, ȳ) m. neck, nape, AO, CP. [_ON._ svīre]

swēorbān n. _neck-bone, neck_.

swēorbēag (u) m. _neck-band, necklace, collar, torque_, Æ.

±sweorc (o) n. _cloud, darkness, mist_.

±sweorcan^3 _to grow dark, darken_ (intr.), _become overcast, be
obscured_: _be troubled, sad, become grievous, troublesome, angry_, ÆL:
_fall out (of mind)_, #JPs# 30^13.

sweorcendferhð _sombre, sad_, #Jud# 269.

±sweorcenes (o, cn) f. _gloom_.

swēorclāð m. _neckcloth_, WW 210^36.

swēorcops m. _yoke, pillory_, #Gl#.

swēorcoðu f. _quinsy_, #Lcd#.

sweord (o, u, y) n. ‘_sword_,’ Æ, AO, CP.

sweordbealo n. _sword-bale_, B 1147.

sweordberende _sword-bearing_, #Gen# 1060.

sweordbite m. _sword-wound_, #Jul# 603.

sweordbora (u) m. _sword-bearer, swordsman_.

sweordfætels m. _sword-belt_, Æ.

sweordfreca m. _swordsman, warrior_, B 1468.

sweordgenīðla ‡ m. _sworded foe_.

sweordgeswing ‡ (y^1) n. _sword-brandishing_.

sweordgifu (y^1) f. _gift of swords_, B 2884.

sweordgripe m. _sword-attack_, #Jul# 488.

sweordhwīta (u, y) m. _sword-furbisher_.

sweordlēoma ‡ (u^1) m. _flashing of swords_.

+sweordod (u) _provided with a sword_, Æ.

sweordplega m. fighting. #Wald# 22.

sweordrǣs m. _attack_, #Ap# 59.

sweordslege m. _sword-thrust_, #Jul# 671.

sweordtīg f. _‘framea,’ sword-sheath_? #LPs# 9^7. [tēag]

sweordwegende (u^1) _sword-bearing_.

sweordwīgend m. _warrior_, #Ex# 260.

sweordwund ‡ _wounded with the sword_.

sweordwyrhta (u^1) m. _sword-maker_? #Lcd# 3·194^10.

+sweorf (y) n. _filings_, #Lcd#.

±sweorfan^3 _to file or grind away, polish, wipe, rub, scour_.
[‘_swerve_’]

swēorhnitu f. _nit which lives on the neck of animals, tick_, WW.

Swēorīce n. _Sweden_, B.

swēorracentēh (ū^1) f. _‘catelle,’ neck-chain_, WW 107^34.

swēorrōd f. _cross worn on the neck_, _EC_ 250 (ū). [v. ‘_rood_’]

swēorscacul m. _yoke, pillory_, WW 116^9.

swēortēag (ē) f. _collar_, #Gl#.

+swēoru (ī, ȳ) np. _hills_, #PPs#.

swēorwærc m. _pain in the neck_, #Lcd#.

sweostor (e, i, u, y) f. indecl. in sg., nap. sweoster, sweostra,
sweostru ‘_sister_,’ _Chr_; Æ, AO: _nun_, _BH_.

+sweos-tor, -tra, -tru fp. _sisters_, AO. +sweosternu bearn _children of
sisters, cousins_.

sweostorbearn n. _sister’s child, nephew, niece_, WW 452^2.

sweostorsunu m. _sister’s son, nephew_, OET. [v. ‘_sister_’]

swēot † n. _troop, army, company, body, swarm_.

sweota? sweote? ‘_scrotum_,’ #Lcd#, v. A 30·134.

sweotel = sweotol

sweotol (i, u, y) _distinct, clear, evident, manifest, open, public_,
AO, CP. [cp. _Goth._ swikunðs]

sweotole (e, o, u) adv. _clearly, precisely, plainly, openly,
visibly_, CP.

±sweotolian (e, u, y) _to show, reveal, make manifest_: _state, explain,
prove_.

sweotollic (y^1) _clear, distinct_. adv. -līce _clearly, precisely,
plainly, visibly, openly_, Æ.

±sweotolung (i, u, y) f. _manifestation, Epiphany_: _definition,
explanation, exposition, declaration_, Æ: _written testimony,
documentary evidence_.

sweotolungdæg (e, u) m. _Epiphany_, Æ.

sweotul = sweotol

swēoðeod f. _Swedes, Sweden_.

sweoðerian = sweðrian

sweoðol I. m? _heat, flame_, B 3145. [cp. swaðul] II. = sweðel

swēowian = swīgian

+swēpa = +swǣpa

swēr = (1) swār; (2) sweger; (3) swēor

±swerian^6 (but occl. wk. pret. swerede) _to ‘swear,’_ Æ, AO, CP:
_speak_? #Sol# 425. [_Ger._ schwören]

swerigendlic _jurative, used in swearing (of certain adverbs)_, #ÆGr#.

swertling m. _titlark_? _warbler_? WW 131^15.

swēs == swǣs

swester (N) = sweostor

±swētan _to make sweet, sweeten_, Æ, CP.

swēte I. adj. _‘sweet,’ pure, fragrant, pleasant, agreeable_, AO, CP.
II. n. _sweetness, sweet_. [swōt]

swetelian (#KGl#) = sweotolian

swētian _to be sweet_, CP 425^14.

+swētlǣcan _to batten_, #RPs# 65^15.

swētlīce _sweetly, pleasantly_, BH 486^4.

swētmete m. _‘sweetmeat,’ dainty_, CP 41^15.

swētnes f. _sweetness, fragrance_, CP: _pleasantness_.

swetole = sweotole

swētswēge _agreeable (of sound)_, DHy 58^8.

swētwyrde _smooth-spoken_, WW: _stuttering_, WW.

sweð = swæð

sweðel (æ, eo) m. _swaddling band, bandage, binding_.

sweðerian = sweðrian

-sweðian v. be-.

sweðolian _to relent, be appeased_, #Chr# 1123.

±sweðrian (a, æ, eo, i) _to retire, vanish, melt away, abate, dwindle,
decrease, subside_.

+sweðrung (æ) f. _failure_, #Lcd#.

sweðu = swaðu

sweðung f. _poultice_.

swic n. _illusion_, CM 441.

+swic n. _offence_, MtR, WW.

swica m. _deceiver, traitor, betrayer_.

±swīcan^1 (†) _to wander_: (†) _depart_: (w. g.) _cease from, yield,
give away_, _AO_; CP: (w. d.) _fail, fall short, be wanting, abandon,
desert, turn traitor_: _deceive_, Æ. ūt s. _go forth_. from s. _fall
off, rebel_. [‘_i-swike_’]

swicc m. _odour, smell, scent_.

swiccræft m. _treachery_.

swicdōm m. _fraud, deception, deceit_, Æ, AO: _betrayal, treason_:
_scandal, offence_.

swice I. m. (†) _escape, end_: (†) _procrastination, delay_, #Gu# 1007:
_offence, snare, treachery, deceit_. II. adj. _fallacious, deceitful_.
III. f. _trap, snare_, #Gl#. IV. = swicc

swīcend m. _deceiver_, HL 18^39,87.

+swicennes f. _abstention, cessation_, Æ: _repentance_.

swicful _fraudulent, deceitful_, #Gl#.

swician _to wander_: _be treacherous, deceive, cheat_, Æ: _blaspheme_:
_cause to offend_.

+swīcing f. _intermission, cessation_, CM 103.

±swicn f. _purgation, clearance, discharge_, LL.

+swīcnan _to clear (of a charge)_, LL.

swicol _guileful, false, deceitful_, Æ.

swicollic _fraudulent, deceiving, deceptive, causing to stumble_. adv.
-līce.

swicolnes f. _deceit_.

swīcung f. _deceit, fraud, deception_: _stumbling-block, offence_.

swīfan^1 _to revolve, sweep, wend_: _intervene_, EC 164. [_Ger._
schweifen]

swiforu == swipor

swift (y) _‘swift,’ quick_, Æ, AO. adv. -līce. [swīfan]

swiftlēre (u, y) m. _slipper_, Æ. [_L._ subtalaris]

swiftnes f. _swiftness, speed_, Æ.

swiftu f. _swiftness_, #Met# 28^3.

swīgan = swīgian

swīgdagas mp. _days of silence (last three days of Holy Week)_, Æ.

swīge I. swigge f. _silence, stillness, rest_, Æ, CP. II. adj. _still,
quiet, silent, taciturn_, CP.

swīgen f. _silence_, ÆH 2·532^4.

swīgeniht f. _night of silence_, ÆP 154^3 (v. swīgdagas).

±swīgian (ȳ; ī, ēo, ū) _to be or become silent, keep silence, be quiet,
still_, CP.

swīgiendlīce adv. _silently_, HL 18^311.

swīglung f. _silence_, ANS 84·3.

swīgmæsse f. _silent mass_, NC 324.

swīgnes f. _time of silence_, WW 211^42.

+swigra (e) m. _sister’s son, nephew, cousin_.

swīgtīma (swīt-) m. _silent time, eventide, early part of the night_, A
8·319.

swīgūht m. _dawn of the days of silence_ (v. swīgdagas), ANS 84·7.

±swīgung f. _silence_: _time of silence_: _delay_, NG.

swīgunga adv. _quietly, secretly_.

swilc (æ, e, y) pron. (used substantively) _such a one, he, the same_,
_Æ_: (used adjectivally) ‘_such_,’ _Bl, CP_, _etc._: (as relative)
_which_, (Æ). swilc...hwilc _such...as_; _so...as_. swilc...swilc _so
much (many)...as_; _as much (many)...as_, _Æ, B, Bl, Bo_.

swilce (e, eo, y) adv. and conj. (w. ind.) _just as, as, in like manner,
in such manner, likewise, resembling, thus_: (w. subj.) _as if, as
though_: _also, moreover, too_, _Bo_. [‘_such_’]

swilcnes f. _‘qualitas,’ nature_.

swile (y) m. _tumour, swelling_. [swellan; _Ger._ schwiele]

swilian, swillan _to ‘swill,’ wash, wash out, gargle_.

swiling, swilling f. _swilling, wash, gargle_.

swilt = swylt

swiltan = sweltan

swilð pres. 3 sg. of swellan.

swīlunge = swīglunga  [[form of “swīglung”?]]

swīma m. _vertigo, dizziness_: _swoon_, Æ.

swīmæsse = swīgmæsse

±swimman^3 (y) _to ‘swim,’ float_.

swimmendlic (y) _able to swim_, #ÆGr# 55^3.

swīn (ȳ) n. _wild boar, pig, hog_, pl. ‘_swine_,’ CP; Mdf: _boar-image
(on a helmet)_, B.

+swin n. _song, melody_, #Ph# 137.

+swinc n. _toil, work, effort_, _Æ_: (±) _hardship_, _Gen_.
[‘_i-swinch_’]

±swincan^3 _to labour, work at, strive, struggle_, Æ, CP: _be in
trouble_: _languish_. [‘_swink_’]

+swincdagas mp. _days of tribulation_, #Seaf# 2.

±swincful _toilsome, painful, disastrous_, Æ.

+swincfulnes f. _tribulation_, #LPs# 33^7.

±swinclēas (y) _without toil_, ÆH 2·364^9.

swinclic _laborious_? _manual_? (_of work_), W 294^17.

+swincnes f. _hardship_? NC 345.

swind = spind

swindan^3 _to vanish, consume, pine away, languish_. [_Ger._ schwinden]

swīnen adj. _pig’s, swine’s_.

+swing † I. n. _surge, fluctuation_. II. = +swinc

swingan^3 I. _to beat, strike, smack, whip, scourge, flog, chastise,
afflict_, Æ, AO, CP. sw. on twā _divide by a blow_: _‘swing’ oneself,
fly_, B 2264. [_Ger._ schwingen] II. = swincan

swinge (y) f. _stroke, blow, stripe_: _chastisement_, CP.

swingell f. (often swingel-, swingl- in obl. cases); swingel(l)e f.
_whip, scourge, rod_, Æ: _stroke, stripe, blow_: _affliction_, CP.

swingere m. _striker, scourger_, #Rd# 28^7.

swinglung f. _dizziness_.

swīnhaga m. _pig-pen_, Ct.

swīnhyrde (ī) m. _swineherd_, ZDA 33·230^21.

swīnin (#Gl#) = swīnen

swīnlīc n. _boar-image (on a helmet)_, B 1452.

swinn m. _melody_, OEG.

swīnnes f. _pork food_, #EPs# 16^14.

swinsian (y) _to sound melodiously, make melody, sing_.

swinsung f. _melody, harmony_.

swinsungcræft m. _music_, WW 442^12.

swinsweg? (v. OEG xxxiii), _melody_.

swipa m., swipe f. = swipu

swipian † (eo) _to whip, scourge, beat_. [‘_swipe_’]

±swipor _cunning_, A, BH. adv. -līce.

+swipornes (e^2) f. _wile, cunning_, HL, MkR.

swippan = swipian

swipu (eo, o) f. _whip, stick, scourge_: _chastisement, affliction_.
[_Ger._ schwippe]

swir- = sweor-

swīr- = swēor-

+swiria = +swigra

swirman _to swarm_, #Lcd# 1·384^22.

swister = sweostor

swital, switel, switol == sweotol

swītīma = swīgtīma

swīð (ȳ) _strong, mighty, powerful, active_: _severe, violent_. comp.
swiðre _right (hand, side, etc.)_.

±swīðan [wv. and sv^1? cp. unforswiðen] _to strengthen, establish,
support_: _use force against_, Æ (v. A 36·66).

swīðe (ȳ) adv. _very much, exceedingly, severely, violently, fiercely_,
Æ, AO, CP. comp. swīðor _more, rather_. superl. swīðost _most,
especially, exceedingly_: _almost, nearly_. for swīðe, swīðe swīðe _very
much, very severely_, CP.

swīðfæstnes f. _violence_, LL (138^27).

swīðfeorm _rich, fruitful_: _violent_.

swīðfeormende _becoming violent_, WW 374^11.

swīðferhð † (y) _bold, brave, rash_.

±swīðfrom _very strong, vigorous_. adv. -līce.

swīðhwæt _very active_, #Run# 5.

swīðhycgende (i) † _bold-minded_.

swīðian _to become strong_: _prevail_: _fix_.

swīðlic _intense, excessive, severe, violent_, Æ: _immense_, Æ:
_effective_. adv. -līce, AO, CP.

swīðlicnes f. _excess_, RBL 73^7.

swīðmihtig _very mighty_, #PPs# 85^13.

swīðmōd _stout-hearted, brave_: _insolent, arrogant_.

swīðmōdnes f. _magnanimity_.

swīðnes f. _excess, violence_, CM 458.

swīðor comp. of swīðe.

swīðra comp. of swīð.

swiðrian = sweðrian

swīðrian _to avail, prevail_, Æ.

swīðsnel _very quick, agile_, #Cra# 82.

swīðspecende (ȳ) _verbose, talkative_, OEG 56^140.

swīðsprecel _talkative_, #LPs# 11^4.

swīðstincende _strong-smelling_, WW 408^18.

swīðstrang _very strong_, BH 38^6#b#.

swīðstrēme _having a strong current, rapid_, BH 38^6.

swīðswēge _strong-sounding, heroic_, OEG.

swīður = swīðor comp. of swīðe.

swiung f. _spasm, cramp_, WW 112^19.

swīunga = swīgunga

swodrian _to be fast asleep_, #SPs# 3^5.

swoeg = swēg

swoesendu = swǣsendu  [[form of “swǣsende”]]

swoetnes (#Gl, VPs#) = swētness  [[headword spelled “swētnes”]]

swōg (#VPs#) = swēg

swōgan^7 _to sound, roar, howl, rustle, whistle, rattle_, _Cr, Gen_.
[‘_sough_’]

+swogen _in a swoon, silenced, dead_, Æ.

+swogennes v. in-s.  [[headword spelled “inswōgennes”]]

+swōgung f. _swooning_, #Lcd#.

swol n. _heat, burning, flame, glow_. [swelan; _Ger._ schwül]

swoleð = sweoloð

swolgen pp. of swelgan.

swolgettan _to gargle, wash the throat_, #Lcd#.

swolig f. _burning_, #Lcd#, WW.

swollen pp. of swellan.

swoloð, swoloða m., swoloðe? f. (OEG 23^55) = sweoloð

swolten pp. of sweltan.

swoluð (Æ) = sweoloð

swolwe = swealwe

swom = swamm I. and II.

swon = swan

swoncor = swancor

swong = swang pret. 3 sg. of swingan.

swongor _heavy, inert_. [_Ger._ schwanger]

swongornes f. _sloth, laziness_, CP.

swonrād = swanrād

swopu (NG) = swipu

swor (#Ex# 239) = spor

swōr I. pret. 3 sg. of swerian. II. = sār. III. = swēor

swōra = swēora

sworc == sweorc

sworcen pp. of sweorcan.

sword = sweord

sworen pp. of swerian.

swōretendlic _breathing hardly, short-winded_, WW 355^9.

swōrettan _to breathe hard, pant, yawn, sigh_, Æ.

swōret-ung, -tung f. _hard breathing, panting, sobbing, sighing,
moaning_, Æ.

sworfen pp. of sweorfan.

swornian (a) _to coagulate_, #Gl#.

swōron pret. pl. of swerian.

swostor = sweostor

swōt _sweet_, _JnL, Nar, OEG_. adv. swōte _ÆGr_. [‘_soot_’]

swōtlic _savoury, sweet_, CP 311^8. adv. -līce.

swōtmete m. _sweetmeat, dainty_, #Bo# 33^23.

swōtnes f. _sweetness_, _DR, Shr_. [‘_sootness_’]

swotol = sweotol

swōt-stence, -stencende _sweet-smelling_.

swoðung = sweðung

+swōwung = +swōgung

swūgian (CP) = swīgian

swulc = swilc

swulgon pret. pl. of swelgan.

swulton pret. pl. of sweltan.

swulung = sulung

swummon pret. pl. of swimman.

swuncon pret. pl. of swincan.

-swundennes v. ā-s.

swungen pp., swungon pret. pl. of swingan.

swur- = sweor-

swūr- = swēor-

swust-er, -or, -ur (Æ) = sweostor

swut-el-, -ol-, -ul- = sweotol-

swūwian = swīgian

swyc- = swic-

swyft == swift

swȳg- = swīg-

swȳge = swīge

swyl- = swil-

swyliend = swelgend

swylt (i) m. _death_. [sweltan]

swylt- = swelt-

swyltcwalu † f. _agony of death_.

swyltdæg † m. _death-day_.

swyltdēað m. _death_, #PPs# 55^11.

swylthwīl † f. _hour of death_.

swym- = swim-

swȳn == swīn

swyn- = swin-

swyp- (N) = sweop-

swȳr == swēor

swyrd == sweord

swyrfð pres. 3 sg. of sweorfan.

+swȳsnes = +swǣsnes

swyster = sweostor

swytel, swytol == sweotol

swȳð == swīð

swȳwian = sūgian, swīgian

sȳ = sīe pres. subj. of bēon.

syb, sybb == sibb

±sȳcan (ē, ī) _to suckle_: _wean_, #ASPs# 130^2. [sūcan]

syce (i, ī?) _suckling_, OEG 57^8.

sȳclian = sīclian

sycomer m. _sycamore_, #Bk# 4.

sȳcð pres. 3 sg. of sūcan; sȳcan.

+syd n. _wallowing-place_, WW 146^15. [sēoðan]

sȳd == sīd

+sydian = +sidian

syfan == seofon

syfe = sife

sȳferǣte _abstemious_, RB 119^25.

sȳferlic (ē) _neat, cleanly, pure, sober_. adv. -līce.

sȳferne asm. of sȳfre.

sȳfernes f. _cleanliness, purity, sobriety, moderation_, Æ.

syfeða = seofoða

syfian = seofian

+syflan _to provide with relishes, flavour_. [sufl]  [[under “sufel”]]

syflige, syfling (Æ) f. _food, pap, broth, soup_: _seasoning, relish_.

syfol = sufel

syfon = seofon

sȳfre (ē, ī) _clean, pure, chaste, sober, abstinent, temperate_, Æ.
[_Ger._ sauber]

syftan = siftan

syge I. m. _sight, aspect, view_, FT 64? II. = sige I.

sygel = sigel

sygor = sigor

syh = seoh imperat. of sēon

syht = suht

syhð pres. 3 sg. of sēon I. and II.

+syhðe (#BPs# 120^4) = +sehðe

syl = syle

sȳl I. f. _column, pillar, support_, AO. [_Ger._ säule] II. ds. of sūl,
sulh.  [[simple word “sūl”, compounds “sulh”]]

sȳla m. _ploughman_, OEG 2357. [sulh]  [[under “sūl”]]

sȳlæx f. _a kind of axe_, WW 379^33 (v. ES 43·327).

syle, sylen _miry place, wallowing-place_, OEG. [sol]

sylen = selen

syleð pres. 3 sg. of syllan.

sylf == self

sylfer, sylfor, sylfur (M) = seolfor

sylfren (Æ) = seolfren

sylfwill- (Æ) = selfwill-

sylg ds., sylh ds. and nap. of sūl, sulh.
  [[simple word “sūl”, compounds “sulh”]]

Sȳlhearwa = Sigelhearwa

+sylhðe n. _team of oxen_. [sulh]  [[under “sūl”]]

sylian _to sully, soil, pollute_, _CP, Met_. [‘_sule_’]

syll I. f. _‘sill’, threshold, foundation, base, basis_, _Æ, B, CP_. II.
nap. of sulh.  [[under “sūl”]]

sylla m. _giver_, RBL 25^6. [sellan]

sȳlla (#Deor# 6) = sēlla (sēlra) v. sēl I.

syllan (Æ) = sellan

sylle = syll I.

syllend (Æ) = sellend

syllic == seldlic

sylofr = seolfor

sylofren = seolfren

sȳlra = sēlra v. sēl I.

±syltan (e) _to salt, season_, Æ. [sealt]

sȳma = sēma

sȳman = sīeman

symbel I. n. _feast-day, festivity, revel, feast_, AO: (†) _festival,
holy day_. II. == simbel

symbelcalic m. _chalice_, TC 515^28.

symbelcennes f. _feast of a nativity_, DR.

symbeldæg m. _feast-day, festival, holiday_, Æ.

symbele = simble

symbelgāl _boisterous with carousing, drunk_, DD 79.

symbelgereord n. _banqueting, feasting, carousal_, #Sol# 407.

symbelgifa m. _giver of feasts_, #An# 1419.

symbelhūs n. _guest-chamber_, LkLR 22^12.

symbelian = symblian

symbellic _festive_: _solemn_. adv. -līce _solemnly_.

symbelmōnaðlic adj. _of a festival month_? WW 375^38.

symbelnes f. _festival, feasting, festivity_, Æ: _solemn assembly,
solemn office_.

symbeltīd f. _festival-time_.

symbelwērig _weary with feasting_, #Gen# 2640.

symbelwlonc _elated with feasting_, #Mod# 40.

symbelwynn f. _joy of feasting_, B 1782.

symblan _to feast, banquet_, CP.

symble (Æ) = simble adv.

symblian (i) _to feast, carouse_, CP.

symel == symbel

symeringwyrt f. _violet_, WW 322^9.

syml = symbel I.

syml- = simbl-

symnenlic = semnendlic

syn = synn

sȳn I. = sīen f. II. = sīn, sīen pres. pl. subj. of wesan (bēon). III. =
sīn I.

syn- v. also sin-, synn-.

synbend m. _bond of sin_, #Nic# 504^23.

synbōt f. _penance_, LL (316^31).

synbryne m? _burning ardour of sin_, MFH 143^18.

synbyrðen f. _burden of sin_.

synbysig _guilt-haunted_, B 2227.

synd = sind pres. pl. ind. of wesan (bēon).

+synd- = +sund-

syndǣd f. _sinful deed_.

syndan = sendan

synder- = sundor-

synderǣ (u^2) f. _special law_, DR 190^10.

synderlic (e) _singular, separate, special, peculiar, private_, Æ, CP:
_remote_. adv. -līce. [sundor]

synderlicnes f. _separateness, separation, seclusion_, OEG:
_singularity_, GD 286^11.

synder-līpe, -lȳpe, -lȳpig _peculiar, special_. adv. -līpes (ȳ).

synderwurðmynt fmn. _special honour, prerogative_, WW 178^47.

+syndgian _to make to prosper_, BH 320^12.

syndig _skilled in swimming_, #Cra# 58.

syndir- = synder-

+syndlǣcan (synt-) _to cause to prosper_, #RPs# 117^25.

syndolh n. _deadly wound_, B 817 (or = sin-?).

syndon = sindon pres. pl. ind. of wesan (bēon).

Syndonisc _Indian_, MF 173, MP 1·592. [_L. Gk._]

syndra? m., syndre? f. = sinder

±syndrian _to sunder, separate, divide_.

syndrig (i) _separate, single_: _‘sundry,’ various_, Æ: _special,
private, peculiar, exceptional, particular_, Æ, AO, CP:
_characteristic_: (distributive) _one each_. [sundor]

syndrige adv. _separately, specially, apart, alone_.

syndrigendlic _discretive_, #ÆGr# 229^7.

syndriglic _special, peculiar_. adv. -līce _specially_: _separately_.

syndrung v. ā-s.

syndurǣ = synderǣ

synew- = sinew-; and v. synu.  [[headword spelled “sinu”]]

synfāh _sin-stained_, #Cr# 1083.

±syngian _to sin, transgress_, Æ, CP.

syngrigendlic = syndrigendlic

syn-grin, -gryn f. _snare or mischief of sin, harm_.

syngung f. _transgression_, _HL_ 12^137. [‘_sinning_’]

synleahter m. _stain of sin_, W 134^24.

synlēas _‘sinless,’ guiltless, innocent_, _CP, Jn, W_.

synlēaw _sinful injury_, W 165^25.

synlic _sinful, foul, wicked_. adv. -līce.

synn (e, i) f. (†) _injury, mischief, enmity, feud_: _‘sin,’ guilt,
crime_, _Bl, Bo, Chr, VPs_; CP.

synn- see also syn-.

synnadæg (N) = sunnandæg

synnecge f. _female sinner_, MH 126^4.

synnes adv. _always_? #Kl#, but v. LL 455^4.

synnful _‘sinful,’ guilty, wicked, corrupt_, _Bl, LkL, VPs_; CP.

synngiend m. _sinner_, #EPs# 111^10.

+synnian _to commit adultery_, NG.

synnig _guilty, punishable, criminal_: _sinful_, CP.

synnlust m. _desire to sin_, Æ.

synoð = seonoð

synrǣs m. _pressure of sin, temptation_, LL (284^9).

synrūst m. _canker of sin_, #Cr# 1321.

syn-sceaða, -scaða † m. _sin-stained wretch, sinful outrager_.

synscyldig _wicked_, DD 168.

synt = sind pres. pl. ind. of wesan (bēon).

+synt- = +synd-

±synto f. _soundness, health_: _prosperity, welfare, salvation_.
[gesund]  [[listed as +sund]]

synwracu † f. _punishment for sin_.

synwund f. _wound of sin_.

synwyrcende † _sinning_.

sypan = sypian

sype m. _wetting, act of soaking through_, _Bo_. [‘_sipe_’]

sypian (i) _to absorb, drink in_, _Lcd_ 94b. [‘_sipe_’]

sȳpian = sīpian

sypo, syppo = swipu

syrc m. = syric

syrce f. = syrice

syre = searwe, v. searo.

sȳre = sīere

syredon = sier(w)edon pret. pl. of sierwan.

syretung f. _lurking place_, WW 440^6. [searu]

syrewrenc = searowrenc

syrewung = searwung

syrfe f. _service-tree_, EC 373. [_L._ sorbus]

syrftrēow n. _service-tree_, KC 3·379^20.

syric = serc

syrice = serce  [[under “serc”]]

sȳring f. _sour milk, buttermilk_. [sūr]

syrode = sierwde pret. 3 sg. of sierwan.

syru == searo

syrwa = searwa gp. of searo.

syr-wan, -wian (Æ) = sierwan

Syrware mpl. _Syrians_.

syrwung = sierwung

syrwwrenc = searowrenc

syster = sester

sȳð I. = sīð. II. v. sūð adv. III. pres. 3 sg. of sēoðan.

sȳð- = sīð-

syðan = siððan

sȳðerra (_BC, Lcd_) v. sūð. [‘_souther_’]

sȳðst pres. 2 sg. of sēoðan.

syððan = siððan

sȳwian = sēowian  [[under “sēowan”]]

syx = siex

syx- (AO) = siex-, six-




+T+


tā I. f. ‘_toe_,’ _Cp, LL, WW_. II. f. (Æ) = tān m.

tabele, tablu f., tabul m. = tabule

tabule f. ‘_table_,’ _BH_: _a wooden hammer, or piece of wood struck as
a signal for assembling monks_, CM: _writing tablet_: _gaming table_:
_table of the law_. [_L._]

tacan^6 _to ‘take,’ seize_, _Chr_ 1072^5,6#d#.

+taccian _to tame, subdue_, GPH 402.

tācen, tācn n., nap. tācen, tācnu _‘token,’ symbol, sign, signal, mark,
indication, suggestion_, _B, BH, CP, Lcd, SPs_: _portent, marvel,
wonder, miracle_, _Bl_; Æ: _evidence, proof_: _standard, banner_.

tācencircol m. _indiction_, TC 126^3.

tācnan (Cp) = tǣcnan

tācnberend m. _standard-bearer_, #ÆGr# 27^15.

tācnbora m. _standard-bearer_: _guide_.

±tācnian _to mark, indicate_: _betoken, denote, signify, represent_,
_Bl, Bo_; CP: _portend_: _demonstrate, express_. [‘_token_’]

+tācni(g)endlic _typical, emblematic_, ÆH 2·278^14; ÆP 122^17.

±tācnung f. _sign, presage, token_, _Bo_: _manifestation, signification,
type_, _Bo, BH_: _indication, symptom, proof_: _dispensation_, AO 60^1.
[‘_tokening_’]

tācon, tācun = tācen

tācor, tācur m. _brother-in-law_, Æ.

tāde, tādi(g)e f. ‘_toad_,’ _WW_.

tæbere _a weaving tool_? _tenterhook_? WW 294^17.

tæcan _to transfer, translate_, Æ. [_ON._ taka]

±tǣcan _to show, declare, demonstrate_, _Æ, AO, BH, LL, RB_: _‘teach’
(‘i-tæche’), instruct, train_, _Æ, Bl, Bo, Lcd, LL_; CP: _prescribe,
direct_, _Æ, CP, WW_. +t. fram _dismiss_, LL 162[22].

tǣcing f. _teaching, instruction_, Æ: _doctrine_: _direction,
injunction, command, rule_.

tǣcnan _to mark by a token, denote, designate, mark out_. [_Ger._
zeichnen]

-tǣcne v. earfoð-t.

tǣcnend m. _indicator_, A 13·329.

tǣcnian = tācnian

tǣcning f. _demonstration, proof_, #Bo# 90^1.

tæfel == tæfl

tæfl fn. _cube, die, game with dice or tables_. [_L._ tabula]

tæfl-an, -ian _to gamble_, #Gl#.

tæfle adj. _given to dice-playing_, #GnE# 185.

tæflere m. _gambler_.

tæflstān m. _gambling-stone, die_, #Gl#.

tæflung f. _gaming, playing at dice_.

tǣg = tēag

tægel, tægl (e) m. ‘_tail_,’ _LL, WW_; Æ.

tæglhǣr n. _hair of the tail_, #Lcd# 1·360^20.

tægðian (M) = teogoðian

tæherian (_NG_) = tēarian

tæhher (NG) = tēar

tǣhte pret. 3 sg. of tǣcan.

tæl (a, e) n. _number_.

tǣl (ā) f. _blame, reproach, calumny, abuse_, _CP, WW_: _blasphemy_.
[‘_tele_’]

+tæl I. (e, ea) n., nap. +talu _number, series_, _Mt_; Æ: _number of
people, tribe_: _catalogue_, WW 418^36: _estimation, opinion_.
[‘_i-tel_’] II. adj. np. +tale _swift, ready_, #PPs# 56^5.

tæla = tela

±tǣlan (ē) _to blame, censure, scold, reprove, reproach, accuse_, Æ, AO,
CP: _speak ill of, slander, insult, deride_, _Bo, LL, WW_: _dispute_.
[‘_tele_’]

tælberend = telgberend

+tælcircul m. _cycle, series_, WW 204^42.

+tælcræft m. _arithmetic_, Æ (e).

+tæld = +teld

-tǣle v. lēof-, un-t.  [[under “lēoftǣl”]]

tǣlend m. _slanderer, backbiter_: _mocker, scoffer_: _reprover_.

tǣlende _censorious, slanderous_.

tǣlere (ē) m. _derider, scoffer_, #KGl# 75^16.

+tælfæst _measurable_, #LPs# 38^6.

tǣlful (ā) _blameworthy_, NC 325.

tælg == telg

tǣlhlehter m. _derision_, WW 172^4. [hleahtor]

tælian = talian

tælla (GPH 394) = telga

tællan = tellan

tǣllēas _blameless_, CP. adv. -līce, CP.

tǣllic _blameworthy, slanderous, blasphemous_. adv. -līce.

tælmearc f. _date, period_, #Gu# 849. [talu]

tælmet n. _measure, portion_, #An# 113. [talu]

tǣlnes (ē) f. _blame, reproof_, CP: _slander, calumny, insult_.

+tælrīm n. _order, succession_, #Sol# 38.

±tælsum _in numbers, rhythmic_, OEG.

tǣlung f. _reproof_, CP: _slander, derision_.

tǣlweorð- = tǣlwierð-

tǣl-wierðe, -wierðlic _reprehensible, blameworthy_, CP. adv. -līce.

tǣlwierðlicnes (eo^2) f. _reprehensible conduct, blameableness_, CP
52^15.

+tælwīs _discreet, capable_, WW 207^40: _skilled in arithmetic_.

tǣlwyrd-, tǣlwyrð- = tǣlwierð-

tǣman = tīeman

tæmespīle f. _sieve-frame, sieve-stand_? _sieve-stake_? LL 455[17]. [ep.
temsian]

tæmian (GD 11^9) = temian

tǣnel (ē^1, ī^2) m. _wicker basket_, _Æ, WW_. [‘_teanel_’; tān]

tǣnen _made of twigs_, OEG. [tān]

tæng- = teng-

tǣnil = tǣnel

tæppa m. _‘tap,’ spigot_, _IM_.

tæppe f? _strip of stuff or cloth, ‘tape,’_ _WW_ 107^33.

tæpp-ed, -et n. _figured cloth, tapestry, carpet_, _TC, WW_. [‘_tapet_’]

tæppelbred n. _footstool_, NG.

tæppere m. _tapster, tavern-keeper_, _Sc, WW_. [‘_tapper_’]

tæppestre f. _tapstress, female tavern-keeper_, _Æ_. [‘_tapster_’]

tæppet = tæpped

tæppian _to open (a cask)_? _furnish it with a tap or spout_? _IM_ 125.
[‘_tap_’]

tæppilbred = tæppelbred

tær pret. 3 sg. of teran.

tǣr = tēar

tǣsan (±) _to pull, tear, comb, card_, _Lcd_: (†) _wound, injure,
assault_. [‘_tease_’]

±tǣse _pleasant_, _Met_: _convenient, suitable_, _B_. [‘_i-tase_’]

+tǣse n. _advantage, convenience_: _pleasure_, CP 387: _useful thing,
implement_.

+tǣsed _soothed_? CP 297^18.

tǣsel f. _‘teasel’ (plant)_, _Lcd_ 1·282^15.

+tǣslic _convenient_. adv. -līce _conveniently_: _gently, softly,
smoothly_, CP.

tæslīce (NG) = ðæslīce

+tǣsnes f. _convenience_, WW.

tǣsu = teosu

tǣtan _to caress_, #Wy# 4. [tāt?]

tætteca m? _rag, tatter, shred_? Æ.

tǣð = tēð, v. tōð.

-tǣwe (ēo) v. æl-t.

tagantes helde f. _‘artemisia’ (plant)_. WW 296^20.

tāh pret. 3 sg. of tēon II.

tāhe (#Gl#) = tā

tāhspura m. _spur, tip of toe_? WW 197^14.

tāhte = tǣhte pret. 3 sg. of tǣcan.

tal (N) = talu

tāl == tǣl

tala = tela

tald = teald pp. of tellan.

+tale v. tæl.

talente f. _‘talent’ (money of account)_, _AO_. [_L._]

talian (æ) (= tellan) _to count, calculate, reckon, account, consider,
think, esteem, value_, CP: _argue_, CP: _tell, relate_, Æ: _impute_, Æ.

+talscipe m. _multitude_, NG.

talt- = tealt-

talu f. _‘tale,’ series, calculation_: _telling, relation,
communication, narrative_, _Æ, KC_: _fable, tale, story_: _accusation_.

+talu v. +tæl.

tālwyrð- = tǣlwierð-

tam ‘_tame_,’ _Æ, Bo, WW_: _tractable, gentle, mild_, _Bo, Gn_.

tama m. _tameness_, #Bo, Met#.

tamcian _to tame, soothe_, NC 326.

-tamcol v. un-t.  [[headword spelled “untamcul”]]

tān I. m. _twig, rod, switch, branch_: _rod of divination_. II.
_shooting_? _spreading_? #Gen# 2360. III. pl. of tā.

tānede _having a disease of the toes_? WW 161^28.

±tang, tange (o) f. (sg. and pl.) _pincers, ‘tongs,’ forceps_, _Æ, BH,
Cp, WW_; Æ.

+tang (w. d.) _in contact with_ (= pret. 3 sg. of +tingan).

+tanglīce _together_, RB 47^15.

tānhlyta m. _soothsayer, augur, diviner_, WW 189^3. [tān, hlot]

tānhlytere m. _soothsayer, diviner_, WW 183^32.

+tanned _tanned_, _WW_ 118^7. [‘_tan_’]

tannere m. ‘_tanner_,’ _KC_ 2·411.

taper (_Lcd, WW_) = tapor

taperæx f. _small axe_, #Chr# 1031#a#; CC 28^16. [_ON._ taparöx]

tapor (ea^1; e^2, u^2) m. _lamp-wick, ‘taper,’ candle_, _CP_: _a feeble
light_, #Ph# 114. [_Celtic?_]

taporberend m. _acolyte_, #Gl#.

taran v. teoru.

targa? m., targe? f. _small shield, buckler_, _KC_. [v. ‘_targe_’]

+targed _furnished with a shield_, OEG 2259.

taru f. _tear, rent_. [teran]

tasol, tasul (#Gl#) = teosel

tāt _soft, tender, joyous_, Leo 806^12.  [[from first edition]]

-tāwere v. flæsc-t.  [[headword spelled “flǣsctāwere”]]

±tāwian _to prepare, make ready, make_: _till, cultivate_, _BH_:
_harass, afflict, insult_, _Æ, AO_. t. tō bysmore _outrage, profane_,
_Æ, W_. [‘_taw_’]

te- = tō-

tēa (NG) = tīen

+tēad (ē) pp. of +tēon.

tēafor I. n. _red, red lead, vermilion, purple_, _WW_. [v. ‘_tiver_’]
II. or ? tēaforgēap (v. GK), meaning doubtful, #Ruin# 31.

tēag (ǣ, ē) f. _cord, band, thong, fetter_, _Cr, WW_ (ē): _case, chest_:
_enclosure_. [‘_tie_’]

tēagan = tēogan, tēon

tēagor (#Gu#) = tēar

tēah I. pret. 3 sg. of tēon I. and II. II. = tēag

teal- = tal-, tæl-, tel-

tēal- = tǣl-

+teald = +teld

tealde pret. 3 sg. of tellan

tealgor = telgor

tealt _unstable, precarious_, _Run, W_. [‘_tealt_’]

tealtian, tealtrian (a) _to totter, shake, stumble, waver_: _be
untrustworthy_: _amble_. [cp. _Ger._ zelter]

tēam (ē) m. _descendant, family, race, line_, _Æ, Mk, TC_:
_child-bearing_, _Æ_: _company, band_, _Æ_: _‘team’ (of horses, oxen,
etc.)_, _WW_: _vouching to warranty, right of jurisdiction in matters of
warranty_, _EC_ (ē), _LL_.

+tēama (ȳ) m. _warrantor, surety_, LL.

tēaman = tīeman

tēamful _fruitful_, _LPs, WW_. [v. ‘_teemfull_’]

tēamian = tīeman

tēampōl m. _breeding pool_, EC 322´.

tēan- (A) = tēon-

teaper (K) = tapor

tēapor (_Lcd_) = tēafor

tēar m. _drop_, _Cr, Lcd_: ‘_tear_,’ _B, Bl_; CP: _what is distilled
from anything in drops, ‘nectar,’_ _WW_; CM.

tearflian _to turn, roll, wallow_, Mk 9^20.

tēargēotende _tear-shedding, tearful_, #Nic# 508^15.

tēarian (tǣherian, ē^1) _to weep_, _JnL_. [‘_tear_’]

tēarig, tēarlic _tearful_.

tēarighlēor _with tearful cheeks_, #Gen# 2274.

tearn (WW 286^7) = stearn

tearos v. teoru.

teart _sharp, rough, severe_, _Æ, OEG_. [‘_tart_’; tær, pret. of teran]

teartlic _sharp, rough_, Æ. adv. -līce, _OEG_. [‘_tartly_’]

teartnes f. _sharpness, roughness, hardness_, _OEG_; Æ. [‘_tartness_’]

teartnumol _biting, effectual_, #Lcd# 1·152^3.

teaslīce (NG) = ðæslīce

tēað = tēoð, pres. pl. of tēon I. and II.

tebl = tæfl

tebl-, tebil- = tæfl-

tēc- = tǣc-

+tēd = +tēad

tēde pret. of (?)*tēn _to grow rough_. [tōh]

tēder == tȳder  [[under “tīder”]]

tēdr- = tȳdr-

tefel, tefil = tæfl

tēfrung = tīfrung

tēg = tēag

tēgan (M) = tīegan

tēge = tīge  [[form of “tīgan” under ‘tīegan’?]]

tegl = tægl  [[under “tægel”]]

tēgð- = tēoð-

tēh = tēah pret. 3 sg. of tēon.

teherian (A) = tēarian

tehher, teher (_NG_) = tēar

tēhton = tǣhton pret. pl. of tǣcan.

teiss (N) = tǣsu

+tel == +tæl

tēl- = tǣl-

tela (i, ea, eo) I. adv. _well, fitly, properly, rightly, very, good_,
CP: _prosperously, beneficially_. II. interj. _well! good!_

±teld n. _tent, tabernacle_, _Æ, BH, TC_. [‘_teld_’]

+teldgehlīwung f. _tabernacle_, A 8·308^34.

teldian _to spread (net)_, _set (trap)_, _Cp, PPs_. [‘_teld_’]

teldsticca m. _tent-peg_, Æ.

+teldung f. _tabernacle_, #EPs# 18^5; 77^60.

+teldwurðung f. _feast of tabernacles_, WW 107^17.

teldwyrhta m. _tent-maker_, Æ.

telede = tealde pret. 3 sg. of tellan.

+telfers nm. _catalectic verse_, OEG.

telg (æ) m. _dye, colour, tincture_.

telga m. _twig, branch, bough, shoot_, CP: _pole, stock_, EC 95´.

+telg-an, -ian _to dye_, WW.

telgberend _yielding a dye_, WW 462^19.

telgestre (æ^1) m. _dyer_, GD 342^3.

telgian I. _to put forth branches_, #Rim# 34. II. = talian. III. =
telgan

telgor mf., telgra m., telgre f. _twig, branch, shoot_, _Æ, Lcd_.
[v. ‘_tille_’]

telgung f. _dye, purple dye_, WW.

telian = tilian

±tellan (æ, ea) _to ‘tell’ (‘i-telle’), reckon, number, compute,
calculate_, _Æ, Bl, Lk_: _account, estimate, consider, think, esteem,
believe_, _CP, Mt_: _charge against, impute to_: _state, recount,
enumerate, announce, relate_, _Æ, Bo, Chr_. t. gelīc _compare_. [talu]

-tellendlic v. un-t.

teltrē, teltrēo n. _weaving-tool_? _tenterhook_? _tent-peg_? WW.

tēm = tēam

tema = tama

tēman = tīeman

tēmbyrst m. _failure to secure a voucher_, EC 202. [tēam]

Temes, Temese f. _river Thames_, AO. [_L._ Tamisia]

±temesian _to sift_, _MkL_ (i^2). [‘_temse_’]

±temian _to tame, subdue_, Æ, CP: (+) _suffer, permit_, ÆL 23^810.

tempel, templ n. ‘_temple_,’ _Æ, Bl, CP, G, VPs_. [_L._ templum]

tempel- = templ-

tempelgeat n. _temple-door_, W 49^25.

templgeweorc n. _structure of the temple_, W 277^25.

templhālgung f. _dedication of the temple_, OEG 40^36.

templic adj. _of a temple_, OEG.

±temprian v. _to ‘temper,’ moderate_, _Æ, Sc_: _cure, heal_, _Æ_:
_control, curb_, _Æ_ (refl.), _Lcd, Sc_. [_Lat._]

temprung f. _tempering, moderation_.

tēn (#VPs#) == tīen

tēnan = tȳnan, tēonan

-tendan (y) v. ā-, for-, on-t.

tender = tynder

tend-ing, -ling f. _burning, stinging_, _NC, GD_. [‘_tinding_’]

tēne = tīen

tēnel (_Ep_) = tǣnel

±tengan (æ) _to press towards, hurry, hasten_, Æ. āweg t. _get away, get
off_. +t. on _assail_, AO.

+tenge _near to, resting on_: _oppressing, burdensome_, AO.

tēnil = tǣnel

tennan _to lure, coax_? #Wy# 4?

tēo pres. 1 sg. of tēon I. and II.

teochian = teohhian

tēode pret. of tēon III., tēogan, teohhian.

teofenian † _to join, put together_.

tēofor = tēafor

tēofrian = tīfrian

tēogan (_OHG._ gizehōn) = teohhian

teogeða, teogoða = tēoða

teogoðian _to ‘tithe,’ grant or pay tithes_, _CP_; _divide by ten_, Æ.

teoh fm., gds. teohhe _race_: _band, troop, company, society_. [_Ger._
zeche]

tēoh imperat. of tēon.

+tēoh n. _matter, material, universe_? #Rim# 2.

teohhe v. teoh.

±teohhian _to determine, intend, propose_, Æ: _consider, think, judge,
estimate_.

+teohhung f. _arrangement, ordering_, HL 13^69.

teohian = teohhian

teol- = tel-, til-

teolðyrl n. ‘_foramen_,’ ‘_fenestra_,’ OEG.

teom (MtR 21^5) = tam

tēon I. (±) sv^2 _to pull, tug, draw, drag, row (boat)_, _BH, CP, LL_:
_withdraw, take_, LL 356,70: _entice, allure, induce, lead, bring_, _BH,
Bl, Bo, Gu_; CP: _bring up, educate_, _Æ, Chr_: _arrogate_, CP: _bring
forth, produce_, _Æ_: _restrain_, LL: _betake oneself to, go, roam_,
_Bo_: (+) _string up, play (instrument)_. +togen _lengthened, long
(of vowels)_, #ÆGr# 49^14. [‘_tee_,’ ‘_i-teon_’; *teohan] II. sv^1 (but
forms belonging to tēon I. often found) _accuse, censure_, _Æ, LL_; AO.
[‘_tee_’; *tīhan] III. (±) _to prepare, furnish forth, arrange, adorn,
deck_: _produce, work, create, make_, Æ: _fix, establish, constitute,
ordain_. [= teohhian] IV. num. = tīen. V. n. = tēona. VI. = dēon
(v. JAW 19)

tēona m. _injury, hurt, wrong_, _Bl, Mt_; AO: _accusation, reproach,
insult, contumely_, Æ, AO, CP: _anger, grief_: _malice_, Æ: _enmity,
hostility_. [‘_teen_’]

tēonan (ȳ) _to injure, irritate, vex, trouble, grieve_: _slander,
insult_.

tēoncwide m. _hurtful speech_: _blasphemy_.

tēoncwidian _to slander, calumniate_, #Gl#.

tēond I. m. _accuser_, LL. II. _drawer_, BH 288^14.

tēone f. = tēona

tēonere m. _slanderer_, #LPs# 71^4.

tēonful _slanderous, evil, rebellious, painful_, _SPs, W_; Æ.
[‘_teenful_’]

tēonhete † m. _malicious hate_.

tēonian (ȳ) _injure, irritate_, _LPs_: _slander_. [‘_teen_’]

tēonlēas _free from suffering_, MF 174.

tēonlēg † m. _destroying flame_.

tēonlic _destructive, shameful, hurtful_. adv. -līce.

tēonrǣden (e^2) f. _abuse, wrong, injury, humiliation_, Æ.

tēonsmið m. _evil-doer_, #Gu# 176.

tēontig = hundtēontig

tēonword n. _reproach, abuse, calumny_.

±tēorian _to fail, cease, become weary, be tired, exhausted_, _Cp, Lcd,
LL, WW_: _‘tire,’ weary, exhaust_, _PPs_. [teran]

+tēorigendlic _failing, defective_, #Sc# 181^4.

teoro = teoru

+tēorodnes f. _debility, weariness_.

teors m. ‘_calamus_,’ ‘_veretrum_,’ _Lcd, WW_. [‘_tarse_’]

teoru (e) n., occl. gs. tearos and wk. a. taran _‘tar,’ bitumen,
distillation from a tree, resin, gum, balsam_, _Cp, Lcd_: _wax from the
ear_.

±tēorung f. _exhaustion, weariness_, Æ.

teosel (a, e) m. _die (‘tessera’)_. [_L._]

teosu (æ, e) f. _harm, injury, ruin_.

teosusprǣc f. _harmful speech_, #PPs# 139^11.

teosuword (teso-) n. _calumny, harmful speech_.

teoswian (e) _to injure, harm_, #Sol# 94.

tēoð pres. pl. of tēon I. and II.

tēoða (ē) ‘_tenth_,’ _Æ, AO, Chr_. tēoðan dǣl _tenth part, ‘tithe.’_
[teogeða

tēoðe _tenthly_, LL 181[10].

±tēoðian _to divide by ten, tithe_, Æ: _take a tenth_: _give
tithes_, CP.

tēoðing = tēoðung

tēoðingdæg m. _tithing day, tenth day_.

tēoðingealdor m. _ruler over ten, dean, captain of ten_.

tēoðingmann m. _‘tithing-man,’ headborough_, _LL_: _captain of ten_,
_Æ_.

tēoðung f. _division into ten, decimation, tenth part, tithe,
‘tithing,’_ _Æ, Lk, LL_: _band of ten men_, _LL_.

tēoðungcēap m. _tithe_, #Bl# 39^11.

tēoðunggeorn _diligent in paying tithes_, A 12·518^26.

tēoðungland n. _land set apart for tithes_, LL 2·750.

tēoðungsceatt m. _tithing-money, tithes_.

tēowlic = tōwlic  [[headword spelled “towlic”]]

teped (_KGl_), tepet = tæpped

tēr (_Lcd_) = tēar

+ter n. _tearing, laceration_: _thing torn_: _tumult, discord_.

±teran^4 (ea, eo) _to tear, lacerate_, _Bo, Jud, LL, Sc_.

terdnes (A 13·34) = teartnes

tergan = tirgan

termen m. _term, end_. [_L._ terminus]

tero, teru (_Ep, WW_) = teoru

tes- = teos-

+tēse = +tǣse

teter m. _tetter, skin eruption, eczema, ringworm_, #Gl#, CP.

teterwert f. _celandine_. [wyrt]

teting = tyhtung  [[variant of “tyhting”?]]

tēð v. tōð.

tēða = tēoða

-tewestre v. wull-t.

Tī = Tīw

tīan (N) = tēon III.

tīber n. _offering, sacrifice, victim_.

tībernes f. _sacrificing, destruction_, AO 50^18.

ticcen (y) n. _kid_, _Æ_ (y), _MtL_. [‘_ticchen_’]

ticgen (NG) = ticcen

ticgende _proudly adorned_, OEG.

ticia m. _‘tick’ (insect)_, _Gl_.

tictator m. _dictator_, AO 70^3. [_L._]

tīd f. _time, period, season, while_, _Æ, AO, B, BH, G_. on tīde _at the
proper time_: _hour_, _Æ, Chr_: _feast-day, festal-tide_, _Chr, MH_:
_canonical hour or service_, _LL, WW_. [‘_tide_’]

tīdan (±) _to betide, happen_, _Bo, LL_: _fall to (one’s lot)_, _BC_.
[‘_tide_,’ ‘_i-tide_’]

tīdanðēnung = tīdðēnung

tidd- = tīd-, tȳd-

tīddǣg † m. _lifetime_.

tīdelīce = tīdlīce

tīdembwlātend = tīdymbwlātend

tīder, tīdre (ē, īe, ȳ) _weak, frail, infirm, faint-hearted_:
_fleeting_.

tīderlic (ē, īe) _weak_, CP.

tīdernes (ē, īe) f. _frailty (of body or soul)_.

tīdfara m. _one who travels at his own convenience_? #Cr# 1674 (or ? two
words).

tīdgenge _having a monthly course, periodical_, GPH 392.

tīdlic _timely, seasonable, opportune_, AO: _temporal_: _temporary_.
adv. -līce.

tīdlicnes f. _opportunity, fit time_, NG.

tīdran = tȳdran

tīdrēn m. _timely rain_, Æ.

±tīdrian (ȳ) _to become feeble, weak_: _decay_.

tīdsang mn. _hour-services, canonical hours, lauds_, Æ.

tīdscēawere m. _astrologer_, WW 176^4.

tīdscriptor m. _chronographer, chronicler_, WW 204^17 (hybrid word).

tīdðēnung f. _service at one of the canonical hours_, FBO.

tīdum adv. _at times, occasionally_.

tīdung f. (usu. pl.) _event, tidings, news_, _Chr_. [‘_tiding_’]

tīdwrītere m. _chronicler_, #Gl#.

tīdwurdung f. _service at one of the canonical hours_, HL 11^67.

tīdymbwlātend (e^2) m. _astrologer_, #Lcd#.

tīeder- = tīder-

tīedran = tȳdran

±tīegan (ē, ī, ȳ) _to ‘tie,’ bind_, _Æ, CP_: _join, connect_, _ÆGr_.
[tēag]

tiegle = tigle

tieht- = tyht-

tīehð pres. 3 sg. of tēon I. and II.

tiel- = til-

tīema = tīma

tīeman (ǣ, ē, ī, ȳ) _to bring forth, engender, beget, propagate_, _Æ,
W_: _make answerable for another person, call as witness_, _Æ_: _vouch
to warranty_, _LL_. [‘_teem_’; tēam]

+tīeme I. (ē, ȳ) _suitable_. II. (ȳ) _team, yoke_, Æ.

tīen (ē, ī, ȳ) num. ‘_ten_,’ _CP_.

tīenambre _holding ten ambers_, #Lcd# 32b(ȳ).

tīenbebod (ē) n. _decalogue_, OEG 11^108.

tīenfeald (ȳ) _tenfold_.

tīengewintred (ȳ) _ten years old_, LL 19[27#h#].

tīenhund (ē) _thousand_.

tīennihte (ȳ) _ten days old_, ANS 129·22.

tīenstrenge (ē, ī) _ten-stringed_, #VPs#.

tīenwintre _ten years old_, Æ (ȳ).

tīer _heap_? (GK), _drop_? (Sedgef.), #Met# 20^81?

tife f. _bitch_, #Lcd# 64a.

tīfer = tīber

tīfrian (ēo, ȳ) _to paint, depict, figure_. [tēafor]

tīfrung (ē) f. _picture_, AS 20^15.

-tīg (ē, ȳ) v. fore-, forð-t.

Tīg = Tīw

tīgan = tīegan

tige == tyge

tigel, tigele f. _earthen vessel, crock, pot, potsherd_: _‘tile,’
brick_, _AO_; Mdf: _slabs for roofing_, _Cp, Lcd, VPs_.

tigelærne f. _tile kiln_? _house of brick_? KC 3·130^29.

tigelen _made of pot, earthenware_, #SPs# 2^9.

tigelfāg _tile-adorned_, #An# 842.

tigelgeweorc n. _brick-making_, Æ.

tigellēah m. brick-field, KC 5·267^21.

tigelstān m. _tile_, ES 11·66. [‘_tilestone_’]

tigelwyrhta (y) m. _brick-maker, potter_.

tigen pp. of tēon II.

tiger pl. tigras ‘_tiger_,’ _Æ, Nar_.

tiggan = tīegan

tīging f. _tie, connection_, #ÆGr# 14^14. [tīgan]

tigl = (1) tigel; (2) tygel

tigle f. _‘muraenula,’ sea-mullet_? WW 180^30.

tigle = tigel

tigol(e) = tigele  [[under “tigel”]]

tigolgetel n. _tale of bricks_, Æ (#Ex# 5^18).

tigon pret. pl. of tēon II.

tīgrisc _of a tiger_, A 4·161.

tigðian (AO) = tīðian

-tīgu v. egeðgetīgu. [egðe]

tigule = tigele  [[under “tigel”]]

tihian = teohhian

tiht == tyht

tīhð pres. 3 sg. of tēon II.

til I. _good, apt, suitable, useful, profitable_: _excellent_: _brave_:
_abounding_. II. † n. _goodness, fitness_. III. n. = till. IV. (N) prep.
_to_, _MtL, OET_. [‘_till_’]

tila = tela

tilen f. _endeavour_, GD 194^12.

tilfremmende _well-doing_, #Rd# 60^7.

tilgan = tilian

tili (OET) = twilic

tilia, tilig(e)a (y) m. _tiller, workman, hand, labourer, farmer,
husbandman_, _Mt_; Æ. [‘_tilie_’]

tilian (eo, y) _to aim at, aspire to, strive after, try, endeavour_, _Æ,
Bl_; CP: (±) _procure, obtain, gain, provide_, _Æ, Chr, PPs_: _exert
oneself, work, make, generate_, _Æ, CP_: _tend, cherish, cultivate,
‘till,’ plough_, _CP, Chr, Lcd, LL_: _trade, traffic_, Æ: (±) _treat,
cure_.

tiligea = tilia

tiling = tilung

till † n. _station, standing-place_.

till- = til-

+tillan _to touch, attain_, Æ.

tillic † adj. _fit, good_. adv. -līce.

tilmōdig † _well-disposed, kind, good_.

tilð, tilðe (y) f. _‘tilth,’ labour, husbandry_, _W_: _crop, harvest_,
_A_: _gain, profit_, OEG.

tilung (eo, ie, io, y) f. _acquisition, procuring_: _care, solicitude_:
_occupation, work, performance_, CP: _tending, culture, husbandry_, Æ:
_produce, gain, income_, Æ.

tīma m. _‘time,’ period, space of time_, _Æ, AO_: _fixed time_, _CP, G,
WW_: _favourable time, opportunity_, _CP_: _a metrical unit_, _A_.

tīman = tīeman

±timber n. _‘timber,’ building material_, _LL_: _act of building_:
_building, structure_, _BH, Lcd, MtL, VPs_: _trees, woods_, _AO_.
[v. Mdf]

timbergeweorc n. _cutting timber_, BC 1·344^9.

+timberhālgung f. _consecration of a building_, OEG 56^287.

timberhrycg m. _wooded ridge_? KC.

timberland n. _land given for repairing and maintaining buildings_.

timbor = timber

±timbran, timbrian _to build, construct, erect, effect, do_, _AO, CP,
PPs_; Æ: _edify, instruct_: _cut ‘timber.’_

+timbre n. _building, structure_, Æ, AO.

timbrend mf. _builder_.

timbrung f. _act of building_, Æ: _structure_: _edification_.

+tīmian (ȳ) _to happen, fall out_, Æ.

tīmlic adj. _temporal, earthly_. adv. -līce _quickly, soon, early_, Æ.

timpane f. _timbrel_. [_L._]

timpestre f. _female timbrel-player_, #LPs# 67^26.

timple f. _a weaver’s instrument_, LL 455[15,1].

tin I. n. ‘_tin_,’ _CP_. II. f. _beam, rafter_, #Gl#. III. = tinen

tīn num. = tīen

tinclian _to tickle_, #Sc#.

+tinclic = +tingelic  [[form of “tynge”?]]

tind m. _spike, beak, prong, tooth of a fork_, _Cp, Ep, Sol_. [‘_tine_’]

tindig _spiked_, WW 116^12.

tindiht _forked, jagged, beaked_.

tindre = tyndre

tinen _made of tin_, _ÆGr_. [‘_tinnen_’]

+ting = +tyng  [[form of “tynge”?]]

tinge = tynge

+tingan^3 _to press against_, #An# 138.

+tingcræft m. _mechanics_, #HGl# 479.

-tīning v. gafol-t.

tinn _beam_, A 19·491.

tinnan _to stretch_, #Gl#: _desire, long for_? _burn_? #Rim# 54.

tinnen = tinen

tīnstrenge = tīenstrenge

tinterg == tintreg

tinterðegn = tintregðegn

tintreg (_AO_; Æ) n., _tintrega_ m. _torture, torment, punishment_, _AO,
Lk, W_. [‘_tintregh_’]

tintreganlic = tintreglic

tintregian _to torment, afflict, torture, punish_, Æ, AO.

tintreglic _full of torment, infernal_, BH 346^12.

tintregstōw f. _place of torment_, #Guth# 38^4.

tintregðegn m. _torturer, executioner_.

tintregung f. _torture, punishment_, Æ.

tintrian (AO) = tintregian

tio- = teo-

tiol- = tel-, til-

tīr (ȳ) m. (†) _fame, glory, honour, ornament_: _name of the rune for
=t=_: _name of a planet and a god (Mars)_, #Run# 17.

tīrēadig † _glorious, famous_.

tīrfæst † _glorious, famous_.

tīrfruma m. _prince of glory_, #Cr# 206.

tirgan (e, y) _to worry, exasperate, pain, provoke, excite_, _Gu_.
[‘_tar_’]

tīrgīng (y) f. _‘zelus,’ provocation_, #BlPs#.

tīrlēas _inglorious, infamous_, B 843.

tīrmeahtig † _of glorious might_.

tirð pres. 3 sg. of teran.

tīrwine m. _(famous) follower, retainer_, #Met# 25^21.

tit, tite = titt

tītelian _to indicate by a written mark, entitle, ascribe_, Æ. [_L._
titulus]

tītelung f. _‘recapitulatio,’ a giving of titles or headings_, OEG 1153.

titolose _‘tidulosa’ (plant)_, OEG 56^425.

titt m. _‘teat,’ nipple, breast_, _Lcd, LkLR_.

tittstrycel m. _teat_, WW 158^44.

tītul m. _‘title,’ superscription_, MkL 15^26. [_L._ titulus]

tīð I. f. _assent, permission_: _giving, grant, boon, favour,
concession_, _Æ, BH_ (tigð). tīðe fremian _to grant_. [‘_tithe_’] II.
pres. 3 sg. of tēon I. and II.

tīða m., tīðe f. (only in phr. t. bēon, weorðan) _sharer in, receiver,
grantee_, _BH, Mt_. [‘_tithe_’]

±tīðian (often w. g. thing and d. pers.) _to give, bestow, grant,
permit_, _Æ, AO, BH_. [‘_tithe_’]

tīðing = tēoðung

+tīung f. _preparation_, Cp 684#a#.

tīurung = tēorung

Tīw _Tiw (northern god of war)_, _Mars_: _name of the rune for =t=_.

tīwesdæg m. ‘_Tuesday_,’ _A_; RB.

tīwesniht f. _Monday night_, #Lcd#.

tō I. prep. α (w. d.) (motion) _‘to,’ into_. tō emnes _abreast of_:
(rest) _at_: (figurative direction, object of verb) _conducing to, to_.
fōn tō rīce _to ascend the throne_: (definition, destination) _for, as
a_. wyrcan tō wīte _to contrive as a punishment_: _in accordance with,
according to_: (time) _at_. tō midre niht _at midnight_. tō dæg
_to-day_. tō langum fyrste _for a long time_: (with gerunds) _to express
purpose, etc._ β (w. g.) (of time) _at_. II. adv. _besides, also_, _Bo_:
_‘too,’ excessively_, _Bl, Cr_: _thereto_: _towards, in the direction
of_: _in addition, besides_. adverbial phrases;--tō ðām (ðǣm), tō ðæs
(1) _so_ (adeo), _to such an extent_. (2) _to that end_. (3) _moreover,
however_. tō hwæs _whither_. tō ðām ðæt, tō ðȳ ðæt _in order that_. tō
ðon ðæt _until_. tō ðæs ðe _when, where_. tō hwon, tō hwȳ _for what,
wherefore_. tō sōðum _truly_. tō ðearfe _according to what is needed_.
ðǣr tō ēacan _in addition thereto_. ne tō wuhte _by no means_. tō him
_next or nearest to him_.

tō- prefix I. with accent (stress) it has the meaning of adv. tō (as in
tōcweðan, tōbringan, tōcuman). [_Ger._ zu-] II. without accent =
_asunder_ (as in tōbrecan). [_Ger._ zer-]

tōætȳcan (ē^3) _to add to, increase_, BH 112^1. [ēac]

tōætȳcnes f. _increase_, BH 2·242.

tōāmearcian to mark out, assign, #Sc# 29^5.

tōāspanan^7 _to entice to one, allure_.

tōāwylian _to roll to, roll_.

tōbǣdan _to elevate, exalt_.

tōbēatan^7 _to beat severely, destroy by beating_, _AO_. [‘_tobeat_’]

tōbecuman^4 _to come to, approach_.

tōbefealdan^7 _to fold together_, WW 343^10.

tōbeflōwan^7 _to flow round or up to_.

tōbegietan^5 _acquire, purchase_, EHy 4^16.

tōbelimpan^3 (impers.) _it belongs, behoves_, #Bl# 49^1.

tōbēotian _to threaten_, BH.

tōberan^4 _to remove, carry off, purloin_, _Æ, Bl_: _scatter, dissipate,
distract, destroy_: _swell_, CP: _separate_. [‘_tobear_’]

tōberennes f. _difference_, WW 390^27.

tōberstan^3 (intr.) _to burst apart, go to pieces_, _Æ, AO_: (tr.)
_cause to burst apart, shatter_, _Æ_. [‘_toburst_’]

tōberstung f. _bursting_, #Lcd# 74a.

tōbīgend _bowing down, tottering_, WW 386^30.

tōblǣdd v. tōblāwan.

tōblāwan^7 (but with rare wk. pp. tōblǣdd) _to blow to pieces, blast,
scatter_, Æ: _puff up, inflate, distend_, _Æ, Lcd_. [‘_toblow_’]

tōblāwennes f. _inflation_, Æ.

tōbodian _to announce_.

tōborstennes f. _abscess_, #Lcd# 1·322^22.

tōbrǣdan _to spread abroad, disperse, scatter_, _Bo_; AO, CP: _spread
out, extend_, _Mt_; Æ: _open, dilate_: _multiply_. [‘_tobrede_’]

tō-brǣdednes, -brǣdnes f. _broadness, breadth_, #Ps#.

tōbrecan^4 _to break in pieces, break up, shatter, destroy, ruin, wreck,
overthrow, annul_, _Æ, Bo, Lcd_; AO, CP: _break through, violate,
force_, Æ, AO: _interrupt_. [‘_tobreak_’]

tōbrēdan I. = tōbregdan. II. = tōbrǣdan

tōbregdan^3 _tear in pieces, wrench apart, rend, lacerate_, _AO, MtR_:
_cast off, shake off_: _turn to, turn about_. slǣpe tōb. _awake, wake
up_. [‘_tobraid_’]

tōbrengnes f. _oblation, offering_, #EPs# 39^7.

tōbrittian = tōbrȳtan

tōbrocenlic _brittle, fragile_, W 263^13.

tōbrȳs-an, -ian _to bruise, shatter, break to pieces_, _Mt_; Æ.
[‘_tobruise_’]

tōbrȳtan _to break in pieces, destroy_, _Æ_: _be repentant_.
[‘_tobryt_’]

tōbrȳtednes f. _contrition, sorrow_, #LPs#.

tōbrȳtendlic _brittle, fragile_, WW 242^12.

tōbryting f. _crushing, contrition_, #Sc# 82^12.

tōbryttian = tōbrȳtan

tōc pret. 3 sg. of tacan.

tōceorfan^3 _to cut, cut to pieces, cut off, cut away_, _Æ, MkL_.
[‘_tocarve_’]

tōcēowan^2 _to bite to pieces, chew, eat_, _Æ_. [‘_tochew_’]

tōch = tōh

tōcime = tōcyme

tōcīnan^1 _to split open, cleave asunder, splinter, crack_, _Cp, Lcd_;
Æ. [‘_tochine_’]

tōcirhūs n. _lodging-house, inn_, WW 147^25.

tōclǣfan _to split, cleave_, OEG 18b^38.

tōclēofan^2 _to cleave asunder, split, divide_, _Bo_; Æ. [‘_tocleave_’]

tōcleofian = tōclifian

tōcleopian = tōclypian

tōclifian _to cleave to, adhere, stick to_, #BPs#.

tōclifrian _to be torn in pieces, scratched about_, Æ.

tōclip- = tōclyp-

tōclypian _to call to, invoke_.

tōclypigendlic _vocative_, #ÆGr#.

tōclypung f. _calling upon, invocation_, Æ.

tōcnāwan^7 _to know, acknowledge, recognize, distinguish, discern_,
Æ, CP.

tōcnāw(en)nes f. _understanding, discernment_, ÆH 2·362^32; GD 311^11.

tōcnyssan _to shake_, RB 121^6.

tōcuman^4 _to come, arrive_, CP.

tōcwæs-cednes (#RPs# 105^30), -tednes (#SPs#) f. _trembling, shaking_.

tōcweðan^5 _forbid, interdict, prohibit_, Æ.

tōcwīsan = tōcwȳsan

tōcwylman _to torment_, HL 12^56.

tōcwȳsan _to crush utterly, grind to pieces, bruise, destroy_: _be
crushed_, Æ.

tōcwȳsednes f. _crushed condition_, Æ: _contrition_, GD 125^11.

tōcyme m. _coming, advent, arrival_, _Æ, Bl, CP_. [‘_tocome_’]

tōcyrcanwerd _towards church_, ÆL 31^902.

tōcyrran (intr.) _to part, separate_, #Chr#.

tōdæg, tōdæge adv. _to-day_, Æ, AO, CP.

tōdǣl = tōdāl

tōdǣlan (ē) tr. and intr. _to divide, separate, scatter, disperse_, _Æ,
AO, Bo, Chr, W_: _dismember, cut off, destroy_: _distribute_, Æ:
_discriminate, distinguish_: _be divided_. [‘_todeal_’]

tōdǣledlīce adv. _separately, distinctly, diversely_, #ÆGr#.

tōdǣlednes f. _division_: _severance, separation_: _intermission,
respite, cessation_, Æ.

tōdǣlendlic _separable, distinct_. adv. -līce.

tōdǣlnes f. _division, separation_, CP.

tōdāl n. _partition, division, separation_, Æ: _difference, distinction,
discretion_, Æ: _dispersion_: _‘comma,’ dividing point, clause, section,
period_.

tōdēlan (#KGl#) = tōdǣlan

tōdēman _to decide, judge, sentence, determine_.

tōdihtnian _to dispose, arrange_, #BlPs# 82^6.

tōdōn anv. _to apply, put to, add_, #Lcd#: _divide, separate,
distinguish_, _Hex, LL_: _undo, open, unbind_, _PPs_. [‘_todo_’]

tōdrǣfan _to scatter, disperse, separate, drive out or apart_, _BH, Mt_;
Æ. [‘_todreve_’]

tō-drǣfednes (Æ), -drǣfnes f. _dispersion, scattering_.

tōdrēfan _to disturb, bring into confusion, trouble_. [drōf]

tōdrēosan^2 _to be destroyed, perish, decay_, _MH_. [‘_todrese_’]

tōdrīfan^1 _to scatter, disperse, drive away_, _B, JnL_; Æ: _destroy,
repel_. [‘_todrive_’]

tōdwǣscan † _to put out, extinguish_.

tōēacan prep. and adv. _besides, moreover, also_, Æ, AO, CP.

tōēacen ptc. _joined to, added_.

tōēcan = tōēacan

tōēcnes = tōīcnes

tōefenes, tōemnes (AO) prep. (d.) _alongside_.

tōendebyrdnes f. _order, series_, BH 216^20.

toeð (#VPs#) = tēð

tōēðian _to inspire_, GD 270^13.

tōfæng = tōfeng

tōfær n. _departure, decease_, LkL 9^31.

tōfaran^6 intr. _to be scattered, disperse, separate, disappear_, _Gen,
Lcd_; AO. [‘_tofare_’]

tōfealdan^7 _to come to land_ (trans. of _L._ ‘applicare’), #ÆGr# 138^9.

tōfeallan^7 _to fall down, collapse_, _AO_: _fall apart, fall off_, Æ.
[‘_tofall_’]

tōfeng I. (?) m. _grip, seizure_, #LPs# 123^6. II. pret. 3 sg. of tōfōn.

tōfēran _to go in different directions, separate, disperse_, Æ: _deal
out, distribute_, Æ.

tōferian _to carry different ways, scatter, disperse, get rid of_: _put
off_: _digest_, RB 32^14.

tōfēsian _to drive away, rout_, W.

tōfindan^3 _to find out_.

tōflēam m. _refuge_, #RPs# 93^22.

tō-flēon, -flēogan^2 _to be dispersed, fly apart, burst_, _Lcd_.
[‘_tofly_’]

tōflēotan^2 _to carry away by a flood_, #Chr# 1097.

tōflōwan^7 _to flow down or apart, be spilt, melt_, Æ, CP: _flow away,
ebb_: _flow to, pour in_: _distract_, CP.

tōflōw-(ed)nes, -en(d)nes f. _flowing, flux_, Æ.

tōfōn^7 _to take to, accept, bring back_.

tō-foran, -foren, -foron prep. (w. d.) (time and place) _before_, _BH,
Chr, G_: (superiority) _above, over, beyond_, _Æ, Bo_: _besides_, ÆH
2·584. [‘_tofore_’]

tōforansettan _to place before_: _come before, anticipate_.

tōforlǣtan^7 _to dismiss_, OEG 605.

tōforlǣtennes f. _remission_, Æ.

toft m. _homestead, site of a house_, _KC, Lcd_; LL 400. [‘_toft_’]

tōfultumian _to help, assist_.

tōfyllan _to smite in pieces_, #PPs# 67^21.

tōfylstan _to help, aid_.

+tog n. _tugging, spasm_, #Lcd# 1·356^3.

tōgædereweard adv. _towards one another_, AO.

tō-gædre, -gædere, -gadere adv. ‘_together_,’ _An, BC, Mt_. tōg. gān,
fōn, cuman _to engage in battle_, #Chr#. [gaderian]

tōgægnes = tōgegnes, tōgēanes

tōgǣlan _to profane, defile_, #LPs# 88^32.

tōgǣnan _to say, affirm_, #LPs# 93^4.

tōgān I. anv. pret. 3 sg. tōēode _to go to or into_: (impers. w. g.)
_come to pass, happen_: _separate, part, depart_, _Æ_. [‘_togo_’] II.
(#Lcd# 1·364) = tōgang

tōgang m. _approach, access, attack_.

tōgangan^7 _to go away, pass away_, _BH, Rd_. [‘_togang_’]

tōgēan prep. w. d. _towards_, _MkL_ (-eægn). [‘_togains_’]

tōgēanes prep. w. d. and a.; adv. _in opposition to, against_, _B, Chr,
SPs_: _towards, to_, _Æ, Bl_. him tōg. _to meet him_: _before_, CP: _in
return, in reply_. [‘_togains_’]

tōgēare adv. _in this year_, A 8·327^10.

tōgeclifian (eo, y) = tōclifian

tōgeclipian (y^3) _to call together, send for_.

tōgecorennes f. _adoption_, DR 29^14.

tōgeēacnian _to add to, increase_.

tōgeēcan = tōgeīcan

tōgeefnan? _to associate with, join oneself to_? AS 38^8. [MS. tōgeenan]

tōgefultumian = tōfultumian

tōgegnes (A) = tōgēanes

tōgegrīpan^1 _to seize, lay hold of_.

tō-gehihtan, -gehyhtan _to add to_.

tōgehlytto f. _fellowship, union_, DR 109^15.

tōgeīcan _to add to, increase_, A 8·306; GD 62^24.

tōgeīcendlic _added to, adjectival, adjective_, #ÆGr#.

tōgeihtnes f. _addition, increment_, A 8·302.

tōgeladung f. _assembly_, MFH 174.

tōgelǣdan _to lead to, bring in_.

tōgelǣstan _to accompany_, WW 365^41.

tōgelaðian _to invite to, summon to_.

tō-gelengian, -gelencgan _to join_.

tōgelēstan = tōgelǣstan

togen pp. of tēon I. (and occly. II.).

tōgenēalǣcan = tōnēalǣcan

tōgenēdan = tōgenīdan

tōgēnes (A) = tōgēanes

tōgengan _to separate_, #Gen# 841.

tōgenīdan (ȳ) _to compel, force_.

tōgēotan^2 _to pour away, spill_: _spread_: _exhaust_.

tōgesamnian _to assemble together_.

tōgescēadan^7 _to expound, interpret_.

tōgescofen (CP) pp. of tōscūfan.

tōgesettan _to put to_, #RPs# 9^39.

tōgetellan _to reckon, compute_: _compare_.

tōgetēon^2,1 _to draw towards, attract_, #BPs#.

togettan impers. _to twitch, be spasmodic_, #Lcd# 81a. [togian]

tōgeðēodan (īe, ȳ) _to adhere, cling to_: _adjoin_, BH 56^30.

tōgewegen _applied_, BH.

tōgewunod _accustomed_, AS 23^9.

tōgeȳcan = tōgeīcan

togian _to draw, drag_, _HL_ 15^308. [‘_tow_’]

tōgife, tōgifes adv. _freely, gratis_.

togīnan^1 _to be opened, split, gape, yawn_. [cp. _Ger._ gähnen]

tōglīdan^1 _to glide away, split, slip, fall asunder, vanish_, _B, Met_.
[‘_toglide_’]

tōgotennes f. _pouring out, effusion, shedding, spreading_, #Lcd#.

+togu np. _traces (of a horse)_, ÆL 31^973.

togung f. _tugging, twitch, spasm_, #Lcd#.

tōh ‘_tough_,’ _Cp, Ep_: _tenacious, sticky_, _Lcd_.

tōhaccian _to hack to pieces_, _Æ_ (3^186). [‘_tohack_’]

tōhǣlan _to emasculate, weaken_, MFH 174.

tōhald = tōheald

tōheald (a, y) adj. and adv. _inclined, forward, in advance_.

tōhēawan^7 _to hew in pieces_, _Æ, Chr_. [‘_tohew_’]

tōhīgung f. _result, effect_, DR.

tōhiht = tōhyht

tohl = tōl

tōhladan^6 † _to scatter, disperse, destroy_ (or ? *tōhlacan).

tōhlēotan^2 _to divide by lot_.

tōhlic _tough, tenacious_. adv. -līce.

tōhlīdan^1 _to split, open, spring apart, burst, gape, break_, AO.

tohlīne f. _tow-line_, WW. [togian]

tōhlocen = tōlocen pp. of tōlūcan.

tōhlystan _to listen_, CP.

tōhnescian _to soften_, #Lcd#.

tōhopa m. _hope_, _Bo, PPs_; CP. [‘_tohope_’]

tōhopian _to hope_, CP.

tōhopung f. _faith, trust_, ÆL 23^155.

tōhrēosan^2 _to fall to pieces, decay_, _BH, W_; ÆL. [‘_toreose_’]

tōhrēran _to break, shake to pieces, destroy_.

tōhricod ptc. _cut off, dispersed_, GPH 398,399.

tōhrȳran _to shake in pieces_, v. OEG 2261.

+toht n. _battle array, battle_, #Ma# 104.

tohte † f. _fight, conflict, battle, campaign_.

tōhwega adv. and sb. _somewhat, some, a little_.

tōhweorfan^3 _to go away, separate, scatter, disperse_, #Chr#.

tōhwon adv. _wherefore, why_: _to which (point)_, _to what extent, how
far, how long_: _to which end, for what purpose or reason_.

tōhyht m. _hope, refuge, consolation_.

tōhyld = tōheald

tōīcan (ē, ȳ) _to increase_, BH 112^1#b#.

tōīcnes (ē^2) f. _increase_, BH 226^31.

tōiernan^3 _to run to, run together_: _flow away, be dispersed_: _run
hither and thither, wander about_.

tōirnan = tōiernan

tol = toll

tōl n. _‘tool,’ instrument, implement_, _Æ, Bo, LL_: _weapon_, _ZDA_
9·424.

tōlǣgon pret. pl. of tōlicgan.

tōlǣtan^7 _to disperse, relax, release_.

tōlætennes f. _despondency_, #Lcd# 1·262^3.

tolcendlīce adv. _wantonly_, GPH 401.

tolcettende ‘_indruticans_,’ v. OEG 1218.

tolcetung f. _wanton excitement_, OEG.

tōlecgan _to disjoin, separate_. [_Ger._ zerlegen]

tōleoðian = tōliðian

tōlēs- = tōlȳs-

tolfrēo ‘_toll-free_,’ _KC_ 4·209.

tolgetung = tolcetung

tōlic = tōhlic

tōlicgan^5 _to lie or extend in different directions, separate, part,
divide_, _AO, BC_. [‘_tolie_’]

tōliðian (eo) _to dismember, separate_, Æ.

toll mn. _impost_, _‘toll,’ tribute_, _Chr, EC, Mt, OEG_:
_passage-money_, _Æ_: _rent_, _Æ_: _act or right of taking toll_, _Æ_.

tollere m. _tax-gatherer, publican_, _Æ, WW_. [‘_toller_’]

tollsceam-ol, -ul m. _seat of custom, treasury_, G.

tollscīr f. _taxing district_, ÆH 2·468^25.

toln f. _toll, custom, duty_, _TC_. [‘_tolne_’]

tolnere m. _tax-gatherer_, _WW_. [‘_tolner_’]

tolsetl n. _place of toll or custom_, Æ.

tōlūcan^2 _to pull apart, dislocate, destroy_, _BH_. [‘_tolouk_’]

tōlȳsan _to dissolve, loosen, relax_, Æ: _unhinge, separate, break
open_.

tō-lȳsednes, -lȳsnes f. _loosing, dissolution, dispersion, destruction,
release, dismissal_: _desolation_, GD: _death_.

tōlȳsend m. _destroyer_, WW 220^13.

tōlȳsendlic _destructive_, #LPs# 119^4.

tōlȳsing (ē) f. _loosing, release, redemption_: _destruction_, #Lcd#
3·20 6^20.

tom = tam

tōm adj. w. g. _free from_, _Cr_ 1211. [‘_toom_’]

tōmældan _to hinder by speech_, DD 26. [meldian]

tōmearcian _to distinguish, describe, note down, enrol_.

tōmearcodnes f. _enumeration, census, enrolment_, Lk 2^2.

tō-mergen, -merigen (Æ) = tōmorgen

tōmetan^5 _to mete out_, #LPs# 107^8.

tōmiddes prep. (w. d.) _amidst, among, in the midst of_, _Æ, Jn_; AO,
CP. adv. _into the midst_, _B, Lcd_. [‘_tomids_’]

tōmorgen adv. _to-morrow_.

tōn dsmn. of tōh.

tōnama m. _other name, surname_, _Mk_; Æ. [‘_toname_’]

+tōnamian v. +tornamian.

tōnēalǣcan _to approach_, #Pss#.

tōnemnan _to distinguish by name, name_, AO.

tōnēolīcan = tōnēalǣcan

tong = tang

tonge = tange  [[under “tange”]]

tonian _to thunder_, #ÆGr# 138^3.

tonice = tunece

tōniman^4 _to divide, separate, take apart_: _take away_.

tōnom- = tōnam-

top m. _‘top’ (highest part)_, _WW_ 143^25: _tassel, tuft_: _top
(plaything)_? _ball_? #ApT# 13^13.

toppa m. _thread_, OEG 23^45.

tor = torr

tōrǣcan (pret. 3 sg. tōrǣhte) _to join, put together_, OEG 4489.

tōrændan = tōrendan

toranēage = torenīge  [[under “torenēage”]]

tōrbegete (o?) _hard to get_, #Lcd# 43b.

torcht = torht

torct- = torht-

torcul n. _wine-press_, MtR 21^33. [_L._]

torcyrre _hard to convert_, MH 110^15.

tord n. _piece of excrement, dung, filth_, #Lcd#.

tordwifel m. _dung-beetle_, #Lcd#.

toren pp. of teran.

tōrendan (æ) _to rend apart, tear in pieces_, _MkL, PPs_. [‘_torend_’]

toren-ēage, -īg(g)e, -īege _blear-eyed_, CP.

tōrēosan = tōhrēosan

tōrfian _to throw, cast missiles, shoot, stone_, _Mk_; Æ: _be tossed_,
NC 326. [‘_torve_’]

torfung f. _throwing, casting (of stones)_, AO.

torht I. n. _clearness, brightness_. II. adj. _bright, radiant,
beautiful, splendid, noble, illustrious_, _Ph_. [‘_torht_’]

torhte adv. _brightly, clearly_: _beautifully, splendidly_.

torhtian _to show_, Cp 216#i#.

torhtlic † _bright, clear, radiant, glorious_. adv. -līce.

torhtmōd † _glorious, noble_.

torhtnes f. _radiance, splendour_.

tōrinnan (CP) = tōiernan

torn I. n. _anger, indignation_: _grief, misery, suffering, pain_.
[_Ger._ zorn] II. adj. _bitter, cruel, grievous_.

+tornamian _to name besides, surname_, LkL 6^14 (= tōnamian, BT)

torncwide † m. _offensive speech_.

torne † adv. _indignantly, insultingly, bitterly, grievously_.

torngemōt n. _battle_, B 1140.

torngenīðla † m. _angry opponent_.

tornīge = torenīge  [[under “torenēage”]]

tornlic _sorrowful, grievous_, #PPs# 125^5.

tornmōd _angry_, #Gu# 621.

tornsorg f. _sorrow, care_, FT 76.

tornword n. _offensive expression_, #Cr# 172.

tornwracu f. _revenge_, #Gu# 272.

tornwyrdan _to be incensed_? AO 54^2.

toroc _grub, weevil_? WW 224^38 (ES 41·164).

tōroren = tōhroren pp. of tōhrēosan.

torr m. _‘tower,’ watch-tower_, _CP, MtL_; AO: _rock, crag_, Mdf. [_L._
turris]

tōryne m. _running together, concourse_, ES 39·353.

tōrȳpan _to scratch_, EC 164^18.

tōsǣlan (impers., w. d. pers. and g. thing) _to be unsuccessful, fail_:
_lack, want_.

tōsamne = tōsomne

tōsāwan^7 _to strew, scatter, spread_, Æ.

tosca m. _frog, toad_, DR, #PPs#.

tōscacan = tōsceacan

tōscādan (#KGl#) = tōscēadan

tōscādennes = tōscēadenes

tōscægde v. tōscecgan.

tōscǣnan _to break in pieces, break_, _Æ, JnL, MkLR_. [‘_toshene_’]

tōsceacan^6 (a) _to shake in pieces_, _WW_: _drive asunder, drive away,
shake off_, _Æ_. [‘_toshake_’]

tōscēacerian _to scatter_, ÆL 23^24.

tōscēad n. _distinguishing, distinction, difference_, Æ, CP.

tōscēadan^7 (ā) _to part, separate, scatter, divide_: _set at variance_,
CP: _discern, discriminate, distinguish, decide_, _Æ, Bo_; CP: _differ_.
[‘_toshed_’]

tōscēadend m. _divider, separator_, WW 223^34.

tōscēadenes (ā) f. _separation_: _distinction_.

tōscecgan (æ) _to be separate, differ_, BH 160^25n.

tōscelian = tōscylian  [[under “tōscyllan”]]

tōscēotan^2 intr. _to spring apart, disperse_, _Æ_. [‘_toshoot_’]

tōscerian (#KGl#) = tōscirian

tōscirian (e, y) _to divide, detach, separate_, #Gl#.

tōscrīðan^1 _to flow apart, disperse_.

tōscūfan^2 _to push apart, scatter_: _impel, incite_, CP: _do away,
remove_.

tōscyftan _to divide, distribute_. [sciftan]

tōscyl-lan, -ian (e) tr. and intr. _to separate, divide_, NC 351.

tōscyrian = tōscirian

tōsēcan _to find out_, AS 7^13?

tōsendan (tr.) _to send to_: _send apart, send out, disperse_:
_destroy_.

tōsēoðan^2 _to boil thoroughly_, #Lcd#.

tōsetednes f. ‘_dispositio_’ #EPs# 72^7.

tōsettan ‘_disponere_,’ #Pss, Bl#.

tōsīgan^1 _to wear out, be threadbare_, Æ.

tōsittan^5 _to be separated_, AO.

tōslacian _to slacken, relax, loosen, dissolve_.

tōslǣfan _to cut up_, NR 32^2.

tōslēan^6 _to strike in pieces, destroy_, _Æ, AO, Gl_: _drive away_, RB
18^3,4. [‘_toslay_’]

tōslīfan^1 _to split_, WW.

tōslītan^1 _to tear asunder, rend, wound, break open, open_, Æ, CP:
_interrupt_: _separate, scatter, destroy_, CP: _distract_: _be
different_, NG.

tōslitnes (y^2) f. _laceration_: _division_.

tōslūpan^2 _to slip away, be relaxed, fall to pieces, open, dissolve_,
Æ, CP: _melt (with fear)_: _be paralysed_. tōslopen _relaxed, loose,
dissolute_.

tōslūping f. _dissolving, dissolution_, #Sc# 68^8.

tōsmēagan _to inquire into, consider_, #Bo# 148^5.

tōsnǣdan _to cut up_, NR 28^5.

tōsnīðan^1 _to cut asunder, cut up_: _cut off, amputate_.

tōsōcn f. _visiting_, NC 326.

tōsōcnes f. _pursuit_, DR 28^18.

tōsōcnung f. _pursuit_, DR 81^7.

tōsomne adv. _together_, _Æ, AO, Bl_; CP. t. cuman _to engage in
battle_. [‘_tosame_’]

tōsomnian _to collect together, bring together_, BH 230^7.

tōsōðan adv. _in sooth, in truth_.

tōspecan = tōsprecan

tōsprǣc f. _speaking to (another)_, _conversation_, Æ, CP.

tōsprǣdan _to spread out_, _IM_; Æ. [‘_tospread_’]

tōsprecan^5 _to speak to, speak_.  [[from first edition]]

tōspringan^3 _to spring apart, fly asunder, crack_, _Æ_. [‘_tospring_’]

tōsprytting f. _inciting_, #Chr# 1101.

tosta = tosca

tōstæncan = tōstencan

tōstandan^6 _to be put off, not to occur_: _stand apart, differ from, be
discordant_, Æ.

tōstencan (ǣ) _to scatter, disperse, drive apart, drag along_, Æ, CP:
_nullify, destroy_: _perish_, #SPs# 829^9.

tō-stencednes (Æ), -stenc(en)nes, f. _dispersion, dissolution,
destruction_.

tōstencend m. _prodigal_, #Lcd#.

tōsteng- = tōstenc-

tōstician _to pierce_, AO 128^14.

tōstihtan _to order, arrange_, #CPs# 111^5.

tōstincan^3 _to distinguish by smell_, ÆH 2·372.

tōstingan^3 _to thrust in, pierce_, #Lcd#.

tō-stregdan, -strēdan^3 (and wv.) _to scatter, dissipate, disperse_, CP:
_distract_: _destroy_.

tōstrēt (CP) pres. 3 sg. of tōstregdan.

tōsundrian _to separate_.

tōswāpan^7 † _to disperse_.

tōswellan^3 _to swell out_, _Æ_. [‘_toswell_’]

tōswengan _to drive asunder, destroy_. [swingan]

tōsweorcan^3 _to obscure_, OEG 1737.

tōswīfan^1 intr. _to separate_, #Met# 11^36.

tōsyndrian _to sunder, separate, divide_: _discriminate_.

+tot n. _pomp, parade, vainglory_, Æ.

tōtalu f. _reputation_, DR 102^3.

tōtellan _to distinguish_, #Met# 16^15.

tōtēon^2,1 _to draw asunder, pull apart, rend, destroy_, AO: _take to
oneself, claim for oneself_, LL (or ? tō prep.).

tōteran^4 _to tear in pieces, bite, lacerate, cut out_, Æ, AO, CP:
_destroy_: _harass (mind)_.

tōtian _to peep out, stick out_, _CP_ 105^5. [‘_toot_’]

tōtihting f. _instigation_, #Chr# 1094.

tōtorfian _to cast about, toss_, Mt 14^24.

tōtræglian _to pull to pieces, strip_, GPH 396^267.

tōtredan^5 _to tread to pieces_? #Gl#.

totrida m. _swing_? #Gl#, WW 276^27.

tōtwǣman (ē, ēa) _to separate, divide, dis-sever_, _AO_; Æ: _break up,
break in pieces, dissolve_: _cause to cease_, LL: _divorce_, #Chr#
958#d#. [‘_totweme_’]

tōtwǣmednes f. _separation, distinction_.

tō-twēman, -twēaman = tōtwǣman

tōð m., ds. and nap. tēð, occl. ds. tōðe and nap. tōð(as) ‘_tooth_,’
_Cp, Lcd, LL, MtR, VPs_; AO: _tusk_, WW 397^27. tōðum ontȳnan _to
utter_.

tōðece (æ^2) m. _toothache_.

tōðenednes f. _stretching, distention_, OEG 5452.

tōðēnian _to attend upon, serve_, #Sc# 102^9.

tōðening f. _distension_, OEG 2^476.

tōðēnung f. _administration_, CM 1185.

tōðerscan^3 _to dash in pieces_, #Chr# 1009.

tōðgār m. _tooth-pick_, #Lcd# 13b.

tōðindan^3 _to swell up, inflate, puff up_, Æ: _be arrogant_.

tōðlēas _toothless_, GPH 394.

tōðmægen n. _strength of tusks_, #GnC# 20.

tōðrǣstan _to crush, destroy_, #CPs# 106^16.

tōðreoma = tōðrima

tōðrescan = tōðerscan

tōðrima (eo^2) m. _enclosure of teeth, gum_.

tōðringan _to drive asunder_, #Rd# 4^27.

tōðsealf f. _tooth salve_, #Lcd#.

tōðsticca m. _toothpick_, WW 219^3.

tōðunden pp. of tōðindan.

tōðundenes f. _the state of being puffed up, arrogance_, Æ.

tōðundenlic _arrogant_. adv. -līce.

tōðunian _to astonish_, WW 346^22.

tōðwærc m. _toothache_, #Lcd#.

tōðwīnan^1 _to disappear_, HL 15^200. [dwīnan]

tōðwyrm m. _a worm in the teeth_, #Lcd# 19a.

tōwælede (NG) pret. sg. of *tōwealwian _to roll to_.

tōward = tōweard

tōwardes = tōweardes

towcræft m. _spinning_, HL 10^339.

tōweard I. adj. _facing, approaching, impending_, _BH, Bl, Lcd_:
_future_, _Æ, Bl, Bo, Mk_. II. prep. (w. d., g.) _towards_, _AO, CP_.
III. adv. _towards, forwards_. [‘_toward_,’ ‘_towards_’]

tōweardes = tōweard II., III.

tōweardlic _in the future_, Æ. adv. -līce, BH 368^21.

tōweardnes f. _future, time to come_.

tōweaxan^7 _to grow apart_, NR 22.

tōweccan _to arouse, excite_, B 2948.

tōwegan^5 _disperse, scatter_, #Ph# 184.

tōwendan _to overthrow, subvert, destroy_, _Æ, AO_. [‘_towend_’]

tōweorpan^3 (e, u, y) _to cast down, break in pieces, dissipate, blot
out, destroy_, _Æ, Bo, Mt_; AO, CP: _throw out_, CP. [‘_towarp_’]

tōwerd = tōweard

tōwerpan = tōweorpan

tō-wesnes (CP), -wesenes, -westnes (BH) f. _dissolution_: _separation,
discord, dissension_.

towettan _to associate with_, LL (322^31).

towhūs n. _tow-house, spinning-house or chamber_, WW 186^29.

tō-wiðere, -wiðre prep. (w. d., a.) _against_: _in answer to_.

towlic _belonging to thread_. t. weorc _material for spinning_, WW.

towmȳderce f. _tow-chest_? _work-box_? TC 538^21.

tōword (#VPs#) = tōweard

tōworpednes = tōworpennes

tōworpennes f. _subversion, destruction, desolation_, Æ, CP:
_dispersion_: _casting out, expulsion_.

tōwrecan^5 † _to drive asunder, scatter, dissipate_.

tōwrītan^1 ‘_adscribere_,’ ‘_describere_,’ OEG 1065.

tōwritennes f. _writing down, description_, Æ.

tōwrīðan^1 _to twist apart, distort_. #ÆGr# 155^15.

towtōl n. _spinning implement_, LL 455[15,1].

tōwunderlic ‘_admirabilis_,’ #SPs# 41^4.

tōwurpan (Æ) = tōweorpan

tōwyrd I. f. _opportunity_, BH 52^21. II. = tōweard

tōwyrpan = tōweorpan

tōwyrpendlic _destructible_, GPH 394.

tōwyrpnes = tōworpennes

toxa (OEG 1858) = tosca

tōȳcan = tōīcan

tōyrnan = tōiernan

tracter _funnel_, NC 351. [_L._ trajectorium]

træd pret. 3 sg., trǣdon pret. pl. of tredan.

træf n., nap. tr(e)afu _tent, pavilion_: _dwelling, building_, #An# 844.

træglian _to pluck, pull_, GPH 398.

trændel = trendel

træppe = treppe

trafu v. træf.

trāg I. † adj. _evil, mean, bad_. II. f. _evil, affliction_, #El# 668.

trāge adv. _evilly, cruelly_, #PPs# 108^20.

-trāglice v. un-t.  [[headword spelled “untrāglīce”]]

traht m. _text, passage_: _exposition, treatise, commentary_, Æ. [_L._
tractus]

trahtað m. _commentary_, WW. [_L._]

trahtbōc f. _(religious) treatise, commentary_, Æ. [trahtian]

traht-ere, -nere (Æ) m. _expounder, commentator, expositor_.

±traht-ian, -nian (Æ) _to treat, comment on, expound, consider_. [_L._
tractare; _Ger._ trachten]

trahtnung, trahtung f. _explanation, exposition, commentary_, Æ.

trāisc _tragic_, BH 154^3.

tramet m. _page (of a book)_, #ÆGr#.

trandende (o^1) _precipitous, steep_, Cp 805#p#.

trappe = treppe

tratung = trahtung  [[under “trahtnung”]]

trē (NG), trēa (#VPs#) = trēow I.

treaflice _grievously_, #PPs# 102^6.

treafu v. træf.

±trēagian _to sew together, mend_, OEG.

treaht- = traht-

trēawa = trēowa

±tredan^5 (eo) tr. and intr. _to ‘tread,’ step on, trample_, _B, CP,
PPs_; AO, Æ: _traverse, pass over, enter upon, roam through_, _B_.

treddan _to tread on, trample_: _investigate_.

-tredde v. ele-, wīn-t.

treddian † _to tread, step, walk_.

trede _fit to tread on, firm_, #Cr# 1166.

tredel m. _step_, WW 117^6: _sole of foot_, LL 438[21]. [‘_treadle_’]

tredend m. _treader_, WW 197^9.

trēg = trīg

trega m. _misfortune, misery, trouble, grief, pain_, _Gen, Met, RB_.
[‘_tray_’]

tregian _to trouble, harass, vex_: _grieve_.

+tregian _to feel repugnance at_, A 2·358.

trehtere = trahtere

trem == trym

tremegan = trymian, trymman  [[under “trymian”]]

tremes = trymes

tremm- = trymm-

-tremman v. wið-t.

trendan _to turn round, revolve, roll_, NC 326.

trendel (æ, y) n. _sphere, circle, ring, orb_, _Æ, Chr, Lcd_: _circus_.
[‘_trendle_’]

trendeled (y^1, y^2) _made round_, WW 152^5. [v. ‘_trindle_’]

trendelnes f. _circuit, surrounding space_, #RPs# 11^9 (u^1).

-trendlian v. ā-t.

trēo == trēow

treodan (#VPs#) = tredan

trēoð = trēowð

trēow I. n. (nap. trēowu, trēow) ‘_tree_,’ _Æ, BH, CP, VPs_; Mdf: _wood,
timber_, _BH_: _beam, log, stake, stick_, _AO, Bl_; CP: _wood, grove_:
_tree of the cross, cross_, _Rood_. II. f. (ū, ȳ) _truth, fidelity,
faith, trust, belief_: _pledge, promise, agreement, treaty_: _favour,
grace, kindness_. [_Ger._ treue]

trēowa (AO, CP) = trūwa

trēowan = trīewan

trēowcynn n. _species of tree_, Æ.

trēowe I. = trīewe. II. = trēow II.

trēowen (ī, ȳ) _of a tree, of wood, wooden_, _Lcd_; Æ. [‘_treen_’]

trēowfæst _true, faithful_, _MtL, PPs_; Æ. [‘_truefast_’]

+trēowfæstnian _to be trusty_, MtL p4^12.

trēowfēging f. _joining together (of boards)_, WW 206^34.

trēowfugol m. _forest bird_, #Gu# 707.

±trēowful _faithful, trusty, true_. adv. -līce.

+trēowfulnes f. ‘_Israel_’ (!) #RPs# 21^25; Hy 7^63.

trēowgeðofta † m. _faithful comrade_.

trēowgeweorc n. _wood-work, a structure of timber_, BH 272^5.

trēowgewrid n. _thicket of trees_, #Guth# 20^7.

trēowian = trīewan

±trēowlēas _faithless, treacherous, false_, CP: _unbelieving_.

trēowlēasnes f. _treachery, faithlessness_: _unbelief, heresy_.

trēowlic _true, faithful, trusty_. adv. -līce, _PPs_. [‘_truly_’]

trēowloga m. _pledge-breaker_, B 2847.

trēowlufu f. _true love_, #Cr# 538.

trēownes (ē) f. _object of trust_, _Bo_ 149^25. [‘_trueness_’]

trēowrǣden f. _state of fidelity_, #Gen# 2305.

±trēowsian _to plight one’s faith_, _Chr, LL_ (ȳ): _exculpate oneself_.
[‘_treowse_’]

trēowsteall n. _grove, plantation_, EC, KC.

trēowstede m. _grove_, WW 149^17.

trēowteru (trēot-) n. _tree-tar, resin_, WW.

±trēowð (īe, ȳ) f. _‘truth,’ veracity_, AO: _troth, faith, fidelity_,
_Æ, AO_: _pledge, covenant_, _Æ_.

trēowðrāg f. _time for faithfulness, fidelity_, #Rim# 57.

trēowufæst = trēowfæst

trēowwæstm m. _produce of trees_, #Chr#.

trēowweorðung f. _tree-worshipping_, LL.

trēowwyrhta (ȳ) m. _wood-worker, carpenter, joiner_.

trēowwyrm m. _cankerworm, caterpillar_, #CJVPs# 77^46.

treppan I. _to ‘trap,’_ _KGl_. II. _to tread_.

treppe (a, æ) f. _‘trap,’ snare_, _WW_.

tret (#KGl#) pres. 3 sg. of tredan.

trēu == trēo, trēow

trēw = trēow

trēw- = trēow-, trīew-

tribulian = trifulian

trideð, triedeð = tredeð, tritt pres. 3 sg. of tredan.

trīew- = trēow-

±trīewan (ē, ēo, ī, ȳ) w. d. _to believe, trust in, hope, be confident,
rely (on)_, _B, Bo, Gen_: (refl.) _exculpate oneself_, _LL_: (+)
_persuade, suggest_: _make true or credible_: _be faithful (to)_.
[‘_trow_’]

±trīewe (ē, ēo, ī, ū, ȳ) _‘true’ (‘i-treowe’), faithful, honest,
trustworthy_, _Æ, B, Chr, LL, WW_; AO.

trifelung f. _grinding, pounding, stamping_, WW 423^25.

trifet (#KGl#), trifot (#Gl#) sb. _tribute_. [_L._ tributum]

trifulian _to break, bruise, stamp_. [_L._ tribulare]

trīg (ē) n. _wooden board, ‘tray,’_ _Lcd_.

trilidi = ðrilīði  [[form of “ðrilīðe”?]]

trim- = trym-

trimilchi = ðrimeolce

trinda? m., trinde? f. _round lump, ball_, #Lcd# 139b.

trindhyrst m. _circular copse_?

tringan^3 _press_, #APs# 103^33 (? *twingan, BT).

trīo- = trēo-, trēow-

trit, tritt pres. 3 sg. of tredan.

trīw == trēow

trīwe = trīewe

trīwen (_WW_) = trēowen

trochscip = trogscip

trod n., trodu f. _track, trace_, _B, LL_. [‘_trod_’; tredan]

trog m. _hollow vessel_, _‘trough,’ tray_, _BC, Gl, JnL, Lcd_: _canoe,
boat_, AO.

trōg (NG) = drōg pret. 3 sg. of dragan.

troghrycg _ridge where there is a water-trough_? EC 447^20.

trogscip n. _a kind of boat_, WW.

troh (LWS) == trog

trōh = ðrōh

trondende _precipitous, steep_, Cp 805#p#.

tropere m. _a book containing verses sung at certain festivals before
the Introit_. [_Late L._ troparium]

trūa = trūwa, trēowa

±trucian _to fail, run short_, _Æ_: _deceive, disappoint_. [‘_troke_’]

trūg- = trūw-

trūgon (NG) = drōgon pret. pl. of dragan.

trūht (u?) _trout_, _Æ_. [_L._ tructa]

trum _firm, fixed, secure, strong, sound, vigorous, active_, Æ, CP.

+trum n. _legion, army, host_.

truma m. (±) _legion, troop_, AO; Æ: _regular order, array_, AO.
[‘_trume_’]

trumian _to grow strong, recover health, amend_, BH: (+) _make strong_.

truming f. _recovery of strength_, #Lcd# 3·210^30.

trumlic _firm, durable, substantial, sound_, CP: _confirming,
exhorting_. adv. -līce.

trumnað m. _confirmation_, #Gu# 729.

trumnes f. _soundness, health_, CP: _firmness, strength, stability_, Æ:
_the firmament, heavens_: _confirmation, support_.

trundulnes = trendelnes

trūs m. _brushwood (for fuel)_, _KC_. [‘_trouse_’]

trūð m. _trumpeter, buffoon, actor_, Æ.

trūðhorn m. _trumpet, clarion_, #Gl#.

trūw = trēow

±trūwa (ēo, ȳ) m. _fidelity, faith, confidence, trust, belief_: _pledge,
promise, agreement, covenant_: _protection_.

+trūwe = +trīewe

±trūwian (ēo, ȳ) occl. pret. trūwde _to trust_, _Æ, CP, JnL_. [‘_trow_’]

+trūwung f. _prop, stay, confidence_, #CPs# 88^19.

+tryccan _to confide, trust_, JnL 16.

tryddian = treddian

trydeð = tredeð, tritt pres. 3 sg. of tredan.

trym † (e) n. _small piece, short length_. fōtes t. _a foot’s length_.

trym- = trum-, trymm-

+trym n. _firmament_, #PPs# 71^16.

+trymednes (#LPs# 104^16) = +trymnes

try-mes (_Mt_) mf., -messe f., -messa m. _a drachm weight_: _an English
coin_. (v. LL 2·683): _a Roman coin, ‘tremissis,’_ = 3 _denarii_.
[‘_thrimsa_’]

trymian, trymman (e) _to strengthen, fortify, confirm, comfort, exhort,
incite_, _CP, Chr, Gen_: _set in order, arrange, prepare, array, arm_,
_AO, Bl_: _become strong_: _be arrayed_: _give (hostages)_. [‘_trim_’]

-trymig, -trymmig v. un-t.

trymmend m. _supporter_: _one who makes an agreement_.

trymmendlic _hortatory, encouraging_.

±trymmung f. _confirmation, strengthening, encouragement_, Æ: _support,
prop_: _edification_, Æ: _ordinance_: (+) _fortress_, #KGl# 67^4.

trymnes f. _firmness, solidity_: _firmament, prop, support_: (±)
_confirmation, strengthening, encouragement_: (±) _exhortation,
instruction_: (+) _arrangement, setting in order_. [trumnes]

tryms = trymes

trymð (i) f. _strength, support, staff, prop_, AS, #LPs#.

tryndel == trendel

trȳw = trēow

trȳw- = trēow-, trīew-

tu = ðu

Tū = Tīw

tū = twā

tua = tuwa

tuā = twā

tube f. _trumpet_, GPH 391. [_L._ tuba]

±tūcian _to disturb, ill-treat, torment, punish_, _Æ, Bo, Met_: (+)
_bedeck_, #PPs# 44^11. [‘_tuck_’]

tud? mn., tudu f? _shield_, OEG 5025 (cp. 747n)

tudder, tuddor = tūdor

tuddorfōster m. _nourishment of offspring_, WW 219^17.

tuddorful _prolific, fruitful_, #Gl#.

tuddorspēd f. _fertility_, #Gen# 2752.

tuddortēonde † _begetting issue_.

tuddres gs. of tuddor.  [[under “tudder”]]

tūdor, tūder n. _posterity, offspring, descendant, issue_, _Æ, CP, Lcd,
WW_: _fruit_. [‘_tudder_’]

tūdorfæst _fertile_, WW 400^35.

tūdornes f. _offspring_, OEG 3849 (tydder-).

tugon pret. pl. of tēon.

tui- = twi-

tulge comp. tylg, superl. tylgest _strongly, firmly, well_.

tumbere m. _tumbler, dancer, player_, #ÆGr# 35^6.

tumbian _to tumble, leap, dance_, _G_. [‘_tumb_’]

tumbing f. _dancing_, NC 327.

tūn m. _enclosure, garden, field, yard_, _Chr, Gl, G, Lcd_: _farm,
manor_, _A, BC, LL_: _homestead, dwelling, house, mansion_, AO, CP:
_group of houses, village, ‘town,’_ _Æ, Gl, JnL_, v. LL 2·352. [v. Mdf]

tūn-cerse (æ^2) f., -cressa m. _garden-cress, nasturtium_, _Cp, Ep,
Lcd_. [‘_towncress_’]

tūncirce f. _church in a_ ‘tūn,’ TC.

tunder = tynder

tunece f. _under-garment, tunic, coat, toga_, Æ, AO. [_L._ tunica]

+tunecod _clothed in a toga_, GPH 393.

tūnesman (_LL_) = tūnmann. [‘_townsman_’]

tunge f. (m) ‘_tongue_,’ _Æ, BH, CP, Lcd_: _speech, language_, _CP,
Mk, RB_.

tūngebūr m. _inhabitant, resident_, #Gl#.

tungel == tungol

tungele? _talkative_, OEG 56^139.

tūngerēfa m. _town-reeve, bailiff_, Æ: _prætor_.

tungeðrum _tongue-ligament_, _Lcd_. [v. ‘_thrum_’]

tungful _talkative_, #Sc# 81^9.

tungilsinwyrt = tunsingwyrt

tungle ds. of tungol.

tunglen _starry_, DHy. [tungol]

tunglere m. _astrologer_, #Gl#.

tungol nm., nap. tunglu, tungol and (late) tunglan _luminary, star,
planet, constellation_, Æ, AO (-gul).

tungolǣ f. _astronomy_, OEG.

tungolbǣre (e^2) _covered with stars_, OEG.

tungolcræft m. _star-craft, astronomy_, Æ.

tungol-cræftiga, -cræftga m. _magician, astrologer_.

tungolcræftwīse (e^2) f. _astronomy_, WW 346^2.

tungolgescēad n. _astrology_, #Gl#.

tungolgim m. _(bright) star_, #Cr# 1151.

tungolwītega m. _star prophet, astrologer_, Æ.

tungul = tungol

tungwōd _sharp-tongued_, #Sc# 223^13.

tūnhōfe f. _ground ivy_, _Lcd_ 123a. [‘_tunhoof_’]

tunice = tunece

tūnincel n. _small property, small farm_, #Gl#.

tuningwyrt = tunsingwyrt

tūnland n. _land forming a_ ‘tūn’ _or manor_, EC 445^6.

tūnlic _rustic_, WW 127^15.

tūnmann m. _villager, rustic, villein_, _Æ, WW_. [‘_townman_’]

tūnmelde f. _orach (plant)_, WW 215^33.

tunne f. _‘tun,’ cask, barrel_, _BC, Cp_; Æ.

tunnebotm m. _bottom of a cask, drum_? WW 123^10.

tūnprēost m. _village priest_, #Chr# 870#f#.

tūnrǣd m. _town council_, ÆL 30^297.

tūnscipe m. _‘township,’ population of a village_, _BH, LL_.

tūnscīr f. _administration of an estate, stewardship_, Lk 16.

tunsingwyrt f. _white hellebore_, #Lcd#.

tūnsōcn f. _‘villarum jura regalia,’ legal jurisdiction over a village_,
TC 308^7 (v. LL 2·455).

tūnsteall m. _farm-stead, farm yard_? KC.

tūnstede m. _village_, WW 144^26.

tunuce = tunece

tūnweg m. _‘privata via,’ by-road_.

tūnyncel = tūnincel

tūr m. _‘tower,’ Chr_ 1097; DR 176^7.

turf f., gds. tyrf _‘turf,’ sod, soil_, _Cp, Guth_; #Lcd#: _greensward_,
_BH, WW_.

turfhaga m. _grassy plot_ (or ?= tyrfhaga A 35·141), #El# 830.

turfhlēow n. _covering of turf_, KC.

turfian = torfian  [[headword spelled “tōrfian”]]

turl _ladle_, Cp 290#t#. [_L._ trulla]

±turnian _to turn, revolve_.

turnigendlic _revolving_.

turning f. _rotation_, W 253^14.

turtla m., turtle f. _turtle-dove_, Æ. [_L._ turtur]

turtur m., turture f. _turtle-dove_.

tūsc m. _‘tusk,’ grinder, canine tooth_.

tuu = tū, twā

Tuu = Tīw

tuwa (Æ, AO, CP), tuwwa (= twiwa) adv. _twice_.

tūx = tūsc

tūxel, tūxl m. _tusk, canine or molar tooth_.

twā I. (v. twēgen). II. adv. _twice_. tū swā lang(e) _twice as long_.

twa- = twi-, twy-

twaddung? twædding f. _adulation_, NC 327.

twǣde num. _two parts out of three, two-thirds_. [twā]

+twǣfan w. g. _to separate from, deprive of_: _hinder_: w. a. _put an
end to_.

twǣgen (M) = twēgen

twælf (M) = twelf

twǣm v. twēgen.

±twǣman (ē) _to divide into two, separate_: _cause to cease, adjust,
settle_. [twā]

twǣmendlīce adv. _alternately, separately_, OEG 1368.

twǣming f. _parting, division, separation_, Æ: _distinction_, Æ.

twǣonung = twēonung

twām v. twēgen.

+twang n. _sport_, OEG 1517.

twānihte _two days old_, #Lcd#.

twe- = twi-

twēgen num. nom. m.; nom. f. twā; nom. n. tū, twā; gen. mfn. twēg(e)a,
twēgra; dat. twǣm, twām _two_, AO, CP. tū swā lang _twice as long_.
t. and t., twām and twām _in parties of two each_.

twēgentig (oe; NG) = twēntig

twelf ‘_twelve_,’ CP.

twelffeald _twelve-fold_, Æ.

twelfgylde _twelve-fold_, LL 3[1].

twelfhund _twelve hundred_, LL.

twelfhynde adj. _belonging to the class whose_ ‘wergild’ _was 1200
shillings_, LL.

twelfnihte _twelve days old_, #Lcd# 3·178^26.

twelfta I. ‘_twelfth_,’ AO. II. = Twelftadæg

Twelftadæg m. Twelfth day, LL 296[17].

twelfte, _twelfthly, in the twelfth place_, LL 182[12].

twelftig = hundtwelftig

twelfwintre _twelve years old_, CP.

twēman = twǣman

twengan _to pinch_, IM. [‘_twinge_’]

twēntig ‘_twenty_,’ Æ, AO.

twēntigfeald _twenty-fold_, #ÆGr#.

twēntigoða (io^3, o^3, u^3) _twentieth_.

twēntigwintre _twenty years old_, W 3^1.

twēo (+ at AS 21^4) m. _doubt, ambiguity_, Æ, AO, CP.

tweo- = twi-, twy-

twēogan = twēon

twēogende _doubting_, BH.

twēogendlic _doubtful, uncertain_, AO. adv. -līce.

tweolf = twelf

twēolic (ī, ȳ) _doubtful, ambiguous, equivocal_. adv. -līce, AO, CP.

±twēon I. pret. sg. twēode _to doubt, hesitate_, AO, CP: (impers. w. a.
of pers.) _seem doubtful_. II. (ī, ȳ) m. _doubt_, #Bo#.

twēonelēoht n. _twilight_, WW 175^34.

±twēonian (ȳ) (pers. and impersonal) _to doubt, be uncertain,
hesitate_, CP.

twēonigend, twēoniendlic (ī, ȳ) _doubtful, expressing doubt_, Æ. adv.
-līce _perhaps_.

twēonol (ȳ) _doubtful_.

twēontig = twēntig

twēonullēoht (WW 175^39) = twēonelēoht

twēonum in phr. ‘be (sǣm, etc.) twēonum,’ _between (the seas, etc.)_.

twēonung (ī, ȳ) f. _doubt, scruple_, Æ.

+tweosa = +twisa

twēoung = twēonung

tweowa = tuwa

twi, twia = tuwa

twī = twig n.

twi- prefix with meaning _two, double_ (see also twy-). [_Ger._ zwie-]

twibēte adj. _subject to double compensation_, LL.

twibill n. _(two-edged) axe_, Æ.

twibille _double-edged_, WW 141^27.

twiblēoh _twice-dyed, double-dyed_, CP.

twibōte (adj. and adv.) = twibēte

twibrowen (y) _twice-brewed_, #Lcd# 45b.

-twicce (æ) v. angel-t.

twiccen = twicen

twiccere m. _one who divided up the food in a monastery_, WW 127^33.

twiccian _to pluck, gather_: _catch hold of_. [‘_tweak_’]

twi-cen, -cene, -cyne (y^1) f. _junction of roads_.

twicere = twiccere

twidæglic (ā, y) _lasting two days_, BH 350^32.

twidǣl m. _double proportion (two-thirds)_, #Lcd#.

twidǣlan _to divide into two_: _differ_, #Sc#.

twidēagod _twice dyed_, OEG 1060.

-twidig v. lang-t.

twie- = twi-, twy-

twi-ecge, -ecgede _two-edged_.

twīendlīce _doubtingly_, #Guth# 70. [twēon]

±twi-feald (Æ), -fald (CP) _two-fold, double, ambiguous_, Æ, CP.

±twifealdan (y^1, y^2) _to double_, Æ.

twifealdlic (a) adj. _twofold, double_. adv. -līce.

twifealdnes f. _duplicity_, CP (ie).

twifēre _accessible by two ways_, WW 194^30.

twiferlǣcan (y) _to dissociate_, #Sc# 68^8.

twifēte (eo, y) _two-footed_, Æ.

twifeðerede _as if with two wings, forked_, #ÆGr# 288^11.

twifingre (y) _two fingers thick_, LL 110[49,3].

twifyldan = twifealdan

twifyrclede _two-forked, divided into two_, #ÆGr# 288^10 (y^1, e^2).

twifyrede _two furrowed_, #ÆGr# 288^11.

twig n. _‘twig,’ branch, sprout, shoot, small tree_, Æ, CP.

twig- = twi-

twiga = (1) twig; (2) tuwa

twigǣrede _cloven_, #ÆGr# 288^10 (y).

twīgan = twēogan, twēon

twigea = tuwa

twigedēagod = twidēagod

twigilde (adj. adv. and ? sb.) _paying double, liable to a double
fine_, LL.

twīh num. (acc.) only in phrase ‘mid unc twīh’ _between us two_, #Gen#
2253. [cp. _Goth._ tweihnai]

twiheafdede _double-headed_, #ÆGr# (y).

twiheolor f. _balance_, Cp 140#b#.

twihinde == twihynde

twi-hīwe (ēo), -hīwede _of two colours or shapes_.

twihīwian _to dissimulate_, #Sc# 44^8.

twihlidede _having two openings_, #ÆGr# 288^6 (y).

twihwēole _two-wheeled_, #Lcd#.

twihwyrft ‘_bilustris_,’ OEG 2513.

twihynde I. _having_ ‘wergild’ _of 200 shillings_. II. _a_ ‘wergild’ _of
200 shillings_, LL.

twihyndeman m. _man of the_ ‘twihynde’ _class_, LL 601[87,4].

twiicce = twiecge

twilæpped _with two lappets_, WW 153^17.

twilafte _two-edged_, WW 194^35.

twilībrocen _woven of threads of two colours_? TC 537^23. [twilic]

twilic _double, woven of double thread_, #Gl#.

twīlic = twēolic

twimylt _twice melted_, OEG 4462.

twīn I. n. _double thread, twist_, _‘twine,’ linen-thread_, CP: _fine
linen_, (_byssus_). II. = twēon II.

twinclian _to ‘twinkle,’ wink_, CP.

twinebbe having two faces, GPH 397^448 (y).

twīnen _of linen_, OEG.

twing? sb. _cluster_, #HGl# 496.

twingan v. tringan.

twīnigend- = twēonigend-

twinihte _two days old_.

±twinn _twin, double, two by two_.

+twinn m. _twin_. pl. _twins, triplets_.

+twinnes (y) f. junction, A 8·331^35.

twīnung = twēonung

twīnwyrm, m. _‘buprestis,’ small insect_, WW 122^27.

twio == tweo

twirǣde (io, y) _uncertain_: _disagreeing_.

twirǣdnes (y^1, e^2) f. _disagreement, discord, sedition_, Æ.

+twis _having the same parents_, #Gl#.

+twisa m. _twin_, Æ.

twisceatte adv. _to the extent of a double payment_, LL 84[68,1].

twiscyldig _liable to a double penalty_, LL 90#h#.

twiseht _disunited, discordant_, #Sc# 192^13 (y).

twisehtan _to disagree_, #Lcd# 3·204^24 (y)? ANS 125·56^295.

twisehtnes f. _dissension, disagreement_, #Sc# 6^12.

twiseltōð _with forked teeth_? WW 108^15.

twisla m. _confluence, junction_, KC 5·198^32.

twisled _branched, forked_.

twislian _to fork, divide into two_, KC.

twisliht _forked, branched_, KC.

twislung f. _division, partition_, #Lcd# 3·436^3.

twisnæcce _double-pointed, cloven_, #ÆGr# 288^11.

twisnēse _double-pointed, cloven_, GPH 393^73.

twisprǣc f. _double speech, deceit, detraction_.

twisprǣce _double-tongued, deceitful, detracting_, Æ.

twisprǣcnes (y) f. _double speech, detraction_.

twisprecan _to murmur_, NG.

twispunnen _twice-spun_, CP 83^23.

-twist v. candel-, mæst-t.

twistrenge _two-stringed_, #ÆGr# 288^10.

twitælged _double-dyed_, #Gl, VPs#.

twi-ðrāwen, -ðrǣwen _twice thrown or twisted, twice woven_, CP.

twiwa = tuwa

twiwǣg f. _pair of scales_, WW 194^28.

twiweg m. _junction of two roads_, WW 177^13.

twi-wintre -winter adj. _two years old_, Æ.

twiwyrdig _ambiguous_, AO.

twoelf = twelf

twōgon = ðwōgon pret. pl. of ðwēan.

twuga, twuwa, twuwu = tuwa

twux = tusc  [[headword spelled “tūsc”]]

twy- = twi-

twȳ = twēo

twȳgean = twēogan, twēon I.

twȳlic (Æ) = twēolic

twȳn == twēon

twȳnihte = twānihte

twyspēcnes = twisprǣcnes

tȳ pres. 1 sg. of tȳn.

tyccen = ticcen

tycht-, tyct- = tyht-

tȳd I. f. = tīd. II. pp. of tȳn.

tȳd- = tīd-

tydd- = tīd-, tūd-

tȳdde I. pret. 3 sg. of tȳn. II. = tīðde, pret. 3 sg. of tīðian.

tȳde pret. sg. of tȳn.

±tȳdran _to bring forth, produce, beget, propagate_: _be prolific_.
[tūdor]

tȳdred _provided with offspring_, #PPs# 143^17.

tȳdrian = (1) tīdrian; (2) tȳdran

tȳdriend m. _propagator_, WW 238^22.

tȳdrung f. _propagation, production_. [tūdor]

tȳfrian = tīfrian

tyg- = tig-

tȳg = tēag

tyge (i) m. _drawing together, pulling, tug, pull_, Æ: _leading
(water)_: _draught (of water)_: _deduction, inference, statement_, Æ
[tēag, tīegan]

tygehōcg (ī) m. _hook for pulling_, LL 455[15].

tygehorn (i) m. _cupping-horn_, #Lcd# 46a.

tygel m. _pulling-rope, rein_, _Æ, WW_. [‘_tial_’]

tygele f. _‘murenula,’ lamprey_? WW.

tygðian = tīðian

tyhhian = teohhian

tȳhst pres. 2 sg. of tēon.

tyht I. (i) m. _instruction, training, habit_, _Bo_: _going, course,
motion, progress_, _El_: _region_, #Gu# 1255. [‘_tight_’; tēon] II. m.
_charge, crime_, LL, WW. [tēon II.]

±tyhtan I. (i) (+) _to stretch, draw, pull_, A: _invite, incite,
instigate, provoke, talk over, persuade, attract, lead astray, seduce_,
_Æ_: (+) _teach, train_, _PPs_. [‘_tight_’; tēon I.] II. _to accuse_.
[tēon II.]

tyhtbysig (i) _involved in accusations, of bad reputation_, v. LL 2·305.

tyhten f. _incitement, excitement_, #Gl#. [tēon I.]

tyhtend m. _inciter, instigator_.

tyhtendlic (i) _persuading, hortatory_, Æ.

tyhtere (i) m. _inciter, enticer_, WW.

tyhting (i) f. _incitement, impulse, instigation, exhortation,
suggestion, instruction, advice_, Æ: _enticement, allurement_, _Æ_.
[‘_tihting_’]

tyhtle (i) f. _accusation, suit, charge_, AO. [tēon II.]

tyhtlian (i) _to accuse, charge_, LL.

tyhtnes (i) f. _inward impulse, instinct, conviction_, WW.

tȳhð pres. 3 sg. of tēon.

tyl == til

tyldsyle f. _tent_, WW 187^4. [teld]

tylg, tylgest v. tulge.

-tyllan v. for-t.

tȳm = tēam

tyma = tama

tȳma = tīma

tȳman (Æ) = tīeman

tymb- = timb-

tymp- = timp-

  [[Printed on one line:
  tymb-, tymb- = timb-, timp-]]

±tȳn I. _to instruct, teach_, _Æ, AO_. II. (Æ) = tīen

tȳn- = tīen-

±tȳnan I. _to hedge in, fence, enclose, shut_, _BH, LkL, LL, MkL_.
[‘_tine_’] II. = tēonan

tyncen n. _bladder_? AO 72^30.

tynder (e, i, u) f. _‘tinder,’ fuel_, _Bo, Sc_; Æ: _cautery_. [tyndan]
  [[under “-tendan”]]

tyndercynn n. _combustible_, WW.

tyndig = tindig

tyndre, tyndren = tynder

+tȳne n. _entrance, court_, #PPs# 115^8.

±tynge I. adj. _fluent, eloquent_. II. adv. (also -līce) _courteously_,
OEG 62853.

+tyngnes (i) f. _fluency, eloquence_, Æ, CP.

tyntreg = tintreg

tȳr == tīr

tyr- = tir-

-tyran (= ie) v. be-t.

tyrdelu, tyrdlu npl. _droppings, small pieces of excrement_, _Lcd_.
[‘_treddle_’]

tȳrende _having watery eyes_, _Lcd_ 1·72. [‘_tear_’]

tyrewa = tyrwa

tyrf v. turf.

+tyrfan _to strike, afflict_, GD 29^9. [torfian]
  [[headword spelled “tōrfian”]]

tyrfhaga f. _hoe, mattock_, Ln 17^2.

tȳrgan = tēorian

tȳriāca m. _(treacle), sovereign remedy_. [_L._ theriacum; _Gk._
θηριακός]

tȳrian = tēorian

tyrnan _to turn, move round, revolve_, Æ. [_L._ tornare]

tyrngeat n. _turnstile_, KC 3·405^4.

tyrning (u) f. _turning round, rotation_, OEG: _rotundity, roundness_,
OEG: _crookedness, deceit_, OEG 56^86.

tyro = teoru

tyrð pres. 3 sg. of teran.

tyrwa m., tyrwe f. _‘tar,’ resin_, Æ. [= teoru]

tyr-wan, -wian (e, i) _to harass, vex_, _LPs_. [‘_tar_’]

tyrwian I. _to ‘tar,’_ B 295. II. = tyrwan

tysca m. _buzzard_, WW 259^12.

tyslian _to put on_, CM 260.

tyslung f. _dressing_.

tysse f. _coarse cloth_. [_OHG._ zussa]

tȳtan _to sparkle, shine_, DD 45.

tytt = titt

tȳð == tīð

tȳw- = tīw-




=Ð=


ðā I. adv. and conj. _then, at that time_, _Æ, AO, CP_: _after that
time, thereupon_, _AO, Jul_: _when, at the time that, whilst, during_,
_AO, B, Bl_: _there, where_, #Chr#: _seeing that, inasmuch as, if, when,
since, as, because_. ðā ðā _when_. ðā...ðā _then...when_. ðā hwīle ðe
_while, whilst, so long as_. ðā gīet v. ðāgīet. [‘_tho_’] II. asf. and
nap. of sē. ðā ðe _which_.

ðaca I. (±) m. _roof, covering_. II. gp. of ðæc.

±ðaccian _to clap, pat, stroke, touch gently_, _CP, Shr_: _smack, beat_,
GD. [‘_thack_’]

ðacele = ðæcele

ðacian _to thatch_, LL 454[10].

ðacum dp. of ðæc.

ðadder (_JnL_ 7^35) = ðider

ðæc I. (ea) n. _covering, roof of a building_, _Chr, MtR, PPs_:
‘_thatch_,’ _Æ, BH_. [‘_thack_’] II. = ðec pron. (das. of ðu).

ðæccille (N) = ðæcele

ðæce f. = ðæc I.

ðæcele (e) f. _torch, lamp, light_. [= fæcele]

ðæcen = ðecen

ðæcile = ðæcele

ðæctigile f. _roof-tile_, Cp 57#i#.

ðæder, ðædres = ðider

ðæderlendisc (MH 178^25n.) = ðiderlēodisc

+ðæf w. g. _agreeing to, consenting to_.

ðǣf (_JnR_) = ðēof

ðæfet- = ðafet-

ðæge mnp. pron. _they, those, them_, _Lk, Jn_. [‘_thaie_’]

ðægen == ðegen

ðægn == ðegn

ðǣgon pret. pl. of ðicgan.

ðǣh (N) = ðēah I. and II.

ðæht (N) == ðeaht

ðǣm (ā, ē) dsmn. and dp. of sē pron. be ðǣm, on ðǣm _thereon, therein_.
ēac ðǣm _in addition to this, besides this, also, moreover_. ǣr ðǣm ðe
_before_. æfter ðǣm _after, later, next, after that (fashion)_. for ðǣm
(ðe) _therefore, on that account, for that reason, because_. on ðǣm ðe
_in this, in that_.

ðǣn = ðegn

ðǣnan _to moisten_, #Lcd#.

ðæncan = ðencan

ðæncung = ðancung

ðæne = ðone asm. of sē.

ðænnan = ðennan

ðænne = ðonne

ðǣr (ē) adv. and conj. _‘there,’ thither, yonder_: _where, whither_:
_then_: _when_: _though, if, so far as, whilst, provided that_: _in that
respect_. ðǣr ðǣr _where, wherever_. ðǣr...of _therefrom_. ðǣr wið _in
regard to that_.

ðǣra gp. of sē, sēo, ðæt.

ðǣrābūtan _about that place_, Æ.

ðǣræfter adv. _thereafter_, CP.

ðǣræt _thereat_, BH 282^6.

ðæran _to dry_, HL 13·103.

ðǣr-big, -bie adv. _‘thereby,’ thus_, _CP_ 42, 43^14.

ðǣrbinnan (o^3) adv. _therein_, Æ, AO.

ðǣrbufan _besides that_, CP.

ðǣre gdf. of sē.

ðærf = (1) ðearf; (2) ðeorf

ðærf- = ðearf-

ðǣrforan conj. _before that_, Æ.

ðærh = ðurh

ðǣrin _‘therein,’ wherein_, _Met_.

ðǣrinne (ē) _therein_, _CP_. [‘_thereinne_’]

ðærle = ðearle  [[form of “ðearl”?]]

ðǣrmid adv. _therewith_, Æ, LL.

ðǣrnēhst _next to that_, LL 280[2,1].

ðærnian _to lose_? #Chr# 1119 (v. MF 174).

ðǣrof adv. _‘thereof,’ of that_, _Lcd_.

ðǣrofer _over or above that_, _CP_. [‘_thereover_’]

ðǣron adv. _therein_, _Æ, CP_: ‘_thereon_,’ _Bl_: _thereinto, thereof_.

ðǣronbūtan = ðǣreābūtan  [[headword spelled “ðǣrābūtan”]]

ðǣrongēn adv. _on the contrary_, W 248^21.

ðǣronuppan adv. _thereupon_, Æ.

ðǣrrihte, ðærrihtes (ā, ē) adv. _thereupon, forthwith, instantly,
immediately, straightway_, Æ.

ðærsc pret. 3 sg. of ðerscan.

ðærscan (NG) = ðerscan

ðærsc-wald, -wold = ðerscold

ðærst = dærst

ðǣrtō adv. _‘thereto,’ to it, to that place_, _Æ_: _besides_, _Æ, BH_:
_for that purpose_, _Æ_: _belonging to_, _Æ_.

ðǣrtōēacan adv. _besides, in addition to that_, Æ.

ðǣrtōgēanes adv. _on the contrary, in opposition thereto_, Æ.

ðǣrðǣr adv. _wherever_, Æ.

ðǣrunder adv. _beneath_, _CP_. [‘_thereunder_’]

ðǣruppan _thereon_, Æ.

ðǣrūt, ðǣrūte adv. _outside, without_, _AO, CP_. [‘_thereout_’]

ðǣrwið adv. _against, in exchange for_, Æ: ‘_therewith_,’ _Bo_.

ðǣrymbe adv. _thereabout, on that point_, W 273^1.

ðǣrymbūtan _thereabouts_.

ðæs I. adv. (gs. of ðæt) _afterwards_, _AO_: _thence_: _accordingly,
according as_, _Æ, BH, Bo_: _therefore, because_, _CP_. ðæs ðe _since,
after, afterwards; therefore, wherefore, because, that; as, according
as; provided_; _(to express proportion) the_. tō ðæs _to that point,
to that degree_. [‘_thes_’] II. gs. of sē and ðæt.

±ðæslǣcan _to agree with, be fitting, suitable_, #Gl#.

ðæslic I. adj. _suitable, congruous_, Æ: _harmonious_: _fair, elegant_.
II. = ðyllic

ðæslīce adv. _opportunely, suitably, aptly, after this manner,
similarly, thus_.

ðæslicnes f. _fitness, convenience_, Æ.

ðǣsma m. _leaven, yeast_, RB 10^18.

ðǣsternes = ðēosternes  [[variant of “ðēostornes”?]]

ðæsðe = ðæs ðe v. ðæs.

ðæt I. conj. and adv. _‘that,’ so that, in order that, after that, then,
thence_. ðæt ðe _that_. II. nas. of sē, ðæt.

ðætte I. pron. _which, that which_. II. conj. _that, so that, in order
that_. tō ðon ðætte _so that_. [ðæt ðe]

+ðafa m. _favourer, supporter, helper_, CP.

ðafetere, ðafettere m. _one who acquiesces in, or condones, what is
wrong_, CP.

+ðafettan (æ, ea) _to consent_, EHy 6^27.

±ðafian (ea) _to allow, suffer, endure, permit, tolerate_, _BH, LL_; CP:
_approve, consent to, submit to_, AO, CP. [‘_i-thave_’]

ðaforlic = ðaroflic, ðearflic  [[“ðaroflic” redirected to “ðearflic”]]

+ðafsum _consenting, agreeing_, NG.

+ðafsumnes f. _consent, agreement_, NG.

±ðafung f. _permission, consent_, Æ.

ðāg, ðāh pret. 3 sg. of ðicgan, ðēon.

ðage = ðæge

ðāgēn = ðe āgēn _who again_, #Bl# 167^6.

ðāgīet, ðāgȳt adv. _still_: _yet_.

ðāgon pret. pl. of ðicgan.

ðāh == ðēah

ðām = ðǣm

ðamettan _to clap (the hands)_? #APs# 97^8.

ðan = ðon adv.

ðān I. adj. _moist, irrigated_, WW. II. n. _irrigated land_. [ðīnan]
III. (LWS) = ðǣm

ðanan = ðanon

ðanc (o) m. _thought, reflection, sentiment, idea_, _An, PPs_; Æ: _mind,
will_: _grace, mercy, favour, pardon_, _Gen, PPs_: _thanks, gratitude_,
_B, Bo, CP, Gen, RB_; AO (ðonc), CP: _pleasure, satisfaction_, CP:
_reward, recompense_, #Gu# 442. Gode ð. _thanks (be) to God_. Godes
ðances _through the mercy of God_. Drihtnes ðances _according to the
will of the Lord_. mīnes ðances _by my favour, of my own will_. on ð.
_willingly, gladly_. an ðance _acceptable, pleasant_, AO. dēofla ðonces
_in honour of devils_, AO. [‘_thank_’]

+ðanc mn. _thought, mind_, _Lk_. [‘_i-thank_’]

ðances adv. _thankfully, gladly_: _voluntarily, gratis_, _BC, Bo, Chr_.
[v. ‘_thank_’]

ðancful adj. (+) _thoughtful, ingenious, clever_: ‘_thankful_,’ _Bl_:
_contented, satisfied_, _BH, WW_: _pleasing, agreeable_, _A_:
_energetic, spirited_. adv. -līce ‘_thankfully_,’ _ÆL_ 2·198.

ðanchycgende _thoughtful_, B 2235.

±ðancian (o) (w. g. thing and d. pers.) _to thank, give thanks_, _Æ, B,
Bo, G, Sat_; CP: _recompense, reward_: (w. i.) _rejoice_. [‘_thank_’]

+ðancmetian _to think over, deliberate_, #Gen# 1917. [metgian]

ðanc-metung (o^1, eo^2), -metegung f. _deliberation, thought_, BH 88^4
(v.l.).

±ðancol _thoughtful, mindful_: _prudent, wise_: (+) _desirous_: (+)
_suppliant_.

ðancolmōd _thoughtful, considerate, prudent, wise, attentive_.

ðanc-snotor, -snottor † _wise, prudent, ingenious_.

ðancung f. _‘thanking,’ thanksgiving_, _Æ, AO, JnL_.

ðanc-weorð, -weorðlic (u^2, y^2) _thankworthy, acceptable_: _thankful,
grateful_: _memorable_. adv. -līce _gladly, willingly_, CP.

ðancword n. _thanks_, #Wid# 137.

ðanc-wurð, -wyrð(e) == ðancweorð

ðand pret. 3 sg. of ðindan.

ðane (#KGl#) = ðone

ðanēcan (o^1) adv. _whenever, as often as_.

+ðang = +ðanc

ðānian (ǣ) _to be or become moist, moisten_, WW.

ðanne = ðonne

ðanon (CP), ðanone (o^1, a^2) adv. _from that time or place, thence,
away_, _B, Bl, Mt, Jud_: _whence, from which, of which_, _CP, PPs_.
ðanon...ðanon _thence...whence_: _then, thereupon, henceforth_: _by
which, through that_. [‘_thenne_’]

ðanonforð adv. _after that, then, thenceforward_, W.

ðanonweard adv. _departing thence_, #Bo# 103^7.

ðanun = ðanon

ðar- = ðear-, ðer-

ðār == ðǣr

ðāra I. = ðǣr. II. gp. of sē, sēo, ðæt.

ðarigend = derigend

  [[No independent entry; see “derian” and “deriendlic”.]]

ðas = ðæs gsmn. of sē.

ðās I. afs. and nap. of ðēs. [‘_those_’] II. nap. of ðāw = ðēow

ðassum (N) = ðissum, dmns. of ðēs.

ðat = ðæt

ðāðā v. ðā.

ðāw I. = ðēaw I. II. = ðēow

+ðāwenian = +ðwǣnan

ðāwian _to ‘thaw,’_ _Lcd_ 3·274.

ðe I. rel. pron. (when govd. by a prep. the prep. follows) _who, which,
that_. ðe is often associated by attraction with pers. pronouns. ðe ic
_I_. ðe we _we_. ðe...his _whose_. sē ðe his _he whose_. II. conj.
_when_: _or_. hwǣðer ðe...ðe _whether...or_. ðe...ðe _the...or,
either...or_: (= ðā) _then_: (= ðǣr) _where_, #El# 717: (with
comparatives) _than_. III. art. _the_ (indecl.), #Chr# 963#e# and late.
IV. particle added to ðēah, for ðǣm, ðæs, etc., without affecting their
meaning [_Goth._ ðau] V. das. of ðu.

ðē = ðȳ

ðēa (NG) = ðēow

ðeac = ðæc

ðeaca = ðaca

ðēada (#VPs#) = ðēoda gp. of ðēod I.

ðēadōm (_DR_) = ðēowdōm

ðēaf (_NG_) = ðēof

ðeafian = ðafian

ðeah pret. 3 sg. of ðicgan.

ðēah I. (ē) conj. and adv. _‘though,’ although, even if, that, however,
nevertheless, yet, still_, _Bl, Bo_; CP. ð. ðe _although_. swā ð.
_nevertheless, yet_. ð. hwæðere v. ðēahhwæðere. II. pret. 3 sg. of ðēon.

ðēah-hwæðere, -hweðre adv. _yet, moreover, however, nevertheless, but_,
_Bl, CP_. swā ð. _yet, nevertheless_. [‘_thoughwhether_’]

ðeaht n. _counsel, advice, design_, Æ. [ðencan]

+ðeaht fn. _thought, consideration, counsel, advice_: _design,
contrivance, scheme_, Æ, CP: _council, assembly_, Æ.

+ðeahta m. _adviser, counsellor_, WW 99^5.

ðeahte pret. 3 sg. of ðeccan.

+ðeahtend m. _counsellor_, WW.

+ðeahtendlic _deliberative_, LL 12.

±ðeahtere m. _counsellor_, BH.

±ðeahtian _to ponder, consider, deliberate upon, take counsel_, Æ, CP.

±ðeahtung (æ) f. _counsel, consultation_.

ðēahðe = ðēah ðe

ðēana adv. _nevertheless, yet_. swā ð. _however_.

ðēara = ðāra, gmfp. of ðæt.

ðearf I. (a, e, y) f. _need, necessity, want, behoof_, _B, Lcd_; CP. tō
ðearfe _as is needed, according to what is needed_: _benefit, profit,
advantage, utility_, Æ: _trouble, hardship, privation, distress,
danger_: _duty, employment_. [‘_tharf_’; ðurfan] II. = ðeorf. III. pres.
3 sg. of ðurfan.

ðearfa (æ, eo) I. m. _poor man, pauper, beggar_, Æ, CP. II. _destitute,
poor, needy_, Æ.

ðearfan = ðurfan

ðearfednes f. _poverty_, BH.

ðearf-end, -igend (#Bk#) (o) m. _poor man_.

ðearfende _needy, in want, poor_, CP.

ðearfendlic _needy, poor, miserable_.

ðearfendnes = ðearfednes

ðearfian _to starve, be in need, want_, #PPs# 71^13. [_Ger._ darben]

+ðearfian _to impose necessity_, B 1103.

ðearflēas adj. _without cause or need_, Æ. adv. -lēase.

ðearflic _profitable, useful, convenient, necessary_, Æ. adv. -līce.

ðearflicnes f. _want, poverty_.

ðearl adj. _vigorous, strong, severe, strict, harsh, violent, heavy,
excessive_. adv. ðearle, Æ, CP.

ðearlic _severe, cruel, harsh, violent, grievous_. adv. -līce, CP.

ðearlmōd † _stern, severe, violent, strong, mighty_.

ðearlwīs _strict, severe, relentless_, CP.

ðearlwīslic _severe_, GD. adv. -līce, CP.

ðearlwīsnes f. _severity, strictness_, BH, GD.

ðearlwȳs- = ðearlwīs-

ðearm (a) m. _gut, entrail_, _Æ, Gl_. [‘_tharm_’]

ðearm(ge)wind n. _windpipe_ (= windðearm), OET 509 (v. ES 43·332).

ðearmgyrd m. _belly-band, girdle, belt_, WW 220^1.

ðearsc = ðærsc pret. 3 sg. of ðerscan.

ðearsm (BH 426^24) = ðrosm

ðēat pret. 3 sg. of ðēotan.

ðēatan = ðēotan

ðēater m? _theatre_, AO 154^2.

ðēatscipe (N) = ðēodscipe

ðēaw I. m. _usage, custom, habit, conduct, disposition_, _AO, B, JnL_;
CP: (in pl.) _virtues_, _(good) manners, morals, morality_, Æ, CP.
[‘_thew_’] II. = ðēow

+ðeawe _customary, usual_, GD.

ðēawfæst _decorous, moral, virtuous, honourable_.

ðēawfæstlīce _correctly_, ÆL 5^222.

ðēawfæstnes f. _obedience, discipline_, Æ.

ðēawful _moral, virtuous_, W 250^4.

ðēawian = ðēowian

ðēawlēas _ill-mannered_, Æ.

ðēawlic _customary_, Æ: _decent, moral_, Æ: _figurative_. adv. -līce.

+ðēawod _well-mannered, moral_, Æ.

ðēb- (#Gl#) = ðēof-

ðec das. of ðu.

ðeccan (±) _to cover, cover over, conceal_, _B, Gen, Lcd, PPs_: (†)
_swallow up_? [‘_thatch_’]

ðeccbryce m. _tile_, #HGl# 459^42.

ðeccend m. _protector, defender_, #PPs# 70.

ðecele = ðæcele

ðecen f. _thatch, tile, covering, roof_: (fig.) _house_, Æ. [ðeccan]

ðecest pres. 2 sg, of ðeccan.

ðecgan I. _to consume_, #Lcd#. II. obl. case of sb? _receptacle_? (BT)
or = ðeccan? (Lieb.), LL 454[10].

+ðēd = +ðēod

ðēde pret. of ðēon (ðȳwan).

ðēf = ðēof

ðēfanðorn, ðefonðorn (#APs# 57^19), ðēfeðorn = ðȳfeðorn

ðēfel = ðȳfel

ðefian _to pant, heave, palpitate_, #HGl#.

ðeften (#HGl# 461^56) = ðyften

ðēfð = ðīefð

ðegan _to serve_, #Gu# 140.

ðegen I. = ðegn. II. pp. of ðicgan.

ðegen- = ðegn-, ðēn-

ðegeð 3 p. sg. pres. of ðecgan.

ðegh (#Gl#) = ðēoh

ðegin = ðegn

ðegn (æ) [v. LL 456; 2·680] m. _servant, minister, retainer, vassal,
follower, disciple_, _BH, Bl, Bo, G, Gl_; AO, CP: _freeman, master
(as opposed to slave)_: _courtier, noble (official, as distinguished
from hereditary)_, _Æ, LL, WW_: (†) _military attendant, warrior, hero_,
_AO, B_. [‘_thane_’]

ðegn-, v. also ðēn-.

ðegnboren (ðegen-) _well-born_, LL.

ðegngylde n. _legal money value of a thane_, W 162^10.

ðegnhyse m. _attendant, retainer_, WW.

±ðegnian (æ, ēn) (w. d.) _to serve, minister, wait on_, _B, BH, Bl, G_;
CP: _supply another with anything_: _perform (an office)_. [‘_theine_’]

ðegnlagu f. _rights, duties or privileges of a thane_, LL, W.

ðegnlic _noble, brave, loyal_, Æ. adv. -lice.

ðegnrǣden f. _thaneship, service_.

ðegnriht n. _rights or privileges of a thane_, LL.

ðegnscipe m. _thaneship, service, duty_: _ability_, AO: _manliness,
valour_, AO: _body of retainers_.

ðegnscolu f. _band of vassals_, WW 371^7.

ðegnsorh f. _sorrow for loss of thanes_, B 131.

ðegnung == ðēn-ung, -ing

ðegnweorud n. _band of followers_, #Cr# 751.

ðegnwer m. _thane’s_ ‘wergild,’ LL.

ðego = ðegu

ðēgon = ðǣgon pret. pl. of ðicgan.

-ðegu v. bēah-, wīn-ð.  [[under “bēagðegu”]]

ðeh (A) = ðec

ðēh I. = ðēoh I. II. (A, K) = ðēah

ðeht == ðeaht

ðel, ðell n. _board, plank_, _(metal) plate_. [_Ger._ diele]

ðelbrycg f. _bridge of planks_, Ct.

ðelcræft = ðylcræft

ðellfæsten n. _fastness made of planks, ship, ark_, #Gen# 1482.

ðellian = ðillian

-ðelu v. buruh-, benc-ð. [‘_theal_’]  [[headword spelled “bencðel”]]

ðēm = ðǣm

ðēn == ðegn

±ðencan I. _to ‘think’ (‘i-thenche’), imagine, think of, meditate,
reason, consider_, _Æ, B, Bo, Bl, LL_; AO, CP: _remember, recollect_,
_CP, RB_: _intend, purpose, attempt, devise_, _B, Bl_: _wish, desire,
long for_. [ðanc] II. (rarely) = ðyncan

ðencendlic _thoughtful_, MFH 174.

ðende = ðenden

ðēnde = ðēonde

ðenden conj. and adv. _meanwhile, while, as long as, until_.

ðene = ðone

ðēnest f. _service, entertainment_, #Chr# 1054#d#.

ðēnestmann (ēo^1) m. _serving-man, retainer_, #Chr# 656#e#.

ðēnestre f. _servant, handmaiden_, OEG 1358.

ðeng = ðegn

ðengel † m. _prince, king, lord, ruler_.

ðenian = ðennan

ðēnian (Æ, CP) = ðegnian

ðēnigmann = ðēningmann

ðēningfæt n. _serving-vessel_, RB.

ðēninggāst m. _ministering spirit_, Æ.

ðēninghūs n. _workshop_, GPH 394.

ðēningmann m. _serving man_, Æ, CP.

ðēnisc _(religious) service_, EC 265?

ðennan (±) _to stretch, extend_, _Lcd_ (æ), _PPs_: _prostrate_: _exert
oneself_: _spread the fame of, magnify_, OEG. [‘_thin_’]

ðenning f. _stretching, extension_, A 11·172.

+ðēnsum _obedient, helpful, useful_, Æ. [ðegen]

ðēnung (ðegn-) _service, ministry_, _Bl, Bo_; CP: (pl.) _attendants,
retinue_: _use_: _church service, mass-book_: _meal-time, meal_, Æ.
[‘_theining_’]

ðēnungbōc f. _book for divine service, mass-book_, Æ.

ðēnungwerod n. _body of serving-men_, MH 218^12.

ðēo I. = ðēow m. II. ds. of ðēoh. III. = sēo II. IV. pres. 1 sg. of
ðēon.

ðēod f. _people, nation, tribe_, _Chr, Lk_; AO, CP; Mdf: _region,
country, province_, _Bo_: _men, war-troop, retainers_: (in pl.)
_Gentiles_, _Æ, MtR_: _language_. [‘_thede_’]

+ðēod pp. of +ðēon, ðȳwan.

±ðēodan _to join, associate (with)_, _attach or subject oneself to_, Æ,
CP: (+) _engage in_: (+) _translate_. ð. fram _separate_.

ðēodbealu † n. _public calamity_.

ðēodbūende † mp. _earth-dwellers, human beings_.

ðēodcwēn f. _queen, empress_, #El# 1156.

ðēodcyning m. _monarch_: (†) _God_.

ðēode pret. 3 sg. of ðēon.

+ðēode n. _speech, language_, AO, CP: _nation_: _translation_, Æ.

ðēodegsa m. _general terror_, #Cr# 834.

ðēoden m. _chief of a tribe, ruler, prince, king_: _God, Christ_. [ðēod;
cp. dryhten from dryht]

ðēodend m. _translator_, OEG 15^6.

+ðēodendlic _copulative_, #ÆGr# 259^1.

ðēodengedāl n. _separation from one’s lord (through his death)_, #Gu#
1324.

ðēodenhold † _faithful to one’s lord_.

ðēodenlēas _without a ruler or chief, lordless_, B 1103.

ðēoden-māðm (-mādm) m. _treasure given by a prince_, #Gen# 409.

ðēodenstōl † m. _throne_.

ðēodeorðe f. _inhabited earth_, W 240^15.

ðēodfēond m. _public enemy_, W.

ðēodfruma m. _prince, ruler_, #Met# 29^94.

ðēodgestrēon n. _people’s treasure, great possession_, B 44; 1218.

ðēodguma † m. _man, warrior_.

ðēodhere m. _national army, host_, #Gen# 2160.

-ðēodig, -ðēodig-lic, -nes v. el-ð.

ðēodisc I. † n. _speech, language_. II. adj. _Gentile_, OEG 8^350.
[_Ger._ deutsch]

+ðēodlæcan _to adhere, cleave to_, #LPs# 24^21.

ðēodland n. _inhabited land, district, country, empire_: _the
continent_.

ðēodlic _national_, #ÆGr# 65^6.

+ðēodlic _social, intimate_.

ðēodlīcetere m. _public deceiver, arch-hypocrite_, W 54^18.

ðēodloga m. _arch-liar_, W.

ðēodmægen n. _troop, host_, #Ex# 342.

±ðēodnes f. (+) _joining, suture_: _conjunction, association_: (+)
_conjugation_, #ÆGr#: (+) _translation_.

±ðēodrǣden f. _intercourse, fellowship_, Æ.

ðēodsceaða m. _public pest, criminal_.

ðēodscipe m. I. _nation, people, community, population_. II.
_connection, association_: _discipline, training, teaching, instruction,
testimony_: _learning, erudition_, CP: _administration, law, authority_:
_conduct_.

ðēodstefn m. _tribe, nation_, #PPs# 83^10.

+ðēodsumnes f. _agreement_, LkL p8^1.

ðēodðrēa f? m? _general distress_, B 178.

ðēodwiga m. _great warrior_, #Pa# 38.

ðēodwita m. _learned man_: _senator_, Æ.

ðēodwundor n. _great wonder_, #Cr# 1155.

ðēof I. (ǣ, ēa) m., _criminal_, _‘thief,’ robber_, _G, LL, OET_. II. f.
_theft_.

ðēofdenn n. _robber’s cave_, KC 3·15^28.

ðēofend (only found in pl.?) f. _thieving, theft_.

ðēofeðorn = ðȳfeðorn

ðēoffeng m. _seizure of thieves by an owner on his own land_: _right to
fines payable on conviction for theft_? TC (v. BT).

ðēofgild n. _payment for theft_, LL.

±ðēofian _to ‘thieve,’ steal_, _LL, TC_.

ðēofmann m. _robber, brigand_, AO ÆP.

ðēofsceaða m. _robber_, v. ANS 129·24n6.

ðēofsceolu = ðēofscolu

ðēofscip n. _pirate-ship_, #Gl#.

ðēofscolu f. _band of robbers_, #Bo# 33^10.

ðēofscyldig f. _guilty of theft_, LL 226´.

ðēofslege m. _slaying of a thief_, LL 97.

ðēofsliht m. _slaying of a thief_, LL 104#b#.

ðēofstolen ptc. _stolen_, LL.

ðēofð = ðīefð

ðēofung f. _thieving_, NC 327.

ðēofunt (NG) = ðēofend

ðēofwracu f. _punishment for theft_, LL 174.

ðēoging f. _increase, profit_: _advance, progress_.

ðēoh I. (ē) n. (gs. ðēos, ds. ðēo; gp. ðēona) _‘thigh,’ hip_, _AO, CP,
Gl, Lcd, MH_. II. imperat. of ðēon.

ðēohece m. _pain in the thigh_, #Lcd#.

ðēohgelǣte n. _thigh-joint_, #Lcd#.

ðēohgeweald np. ‘_genitalia_,’ #Lcd#.

ðēohhweorfa m. _knee-cap_, #Lcd#.

ðēohscanca m. _thigh-bone_, #Lcd#, WW.

ðēohseax (æ^2) n. _hip-sword, short sword, dirk_, WW.

ðēohwræc m. _pain in the thigh_, #Lcd# 1·354^19.

±ðēon I. (sv^1,3) _to thrive, prosper, flourish, grow, increase, ripen_,
_Æ, B, Bl, Lk, Sc_: _be profitable, to become or be great, excel_, CP:
_lengthen (of days)_. [‘_thee_,’ ‘_i-thee_’] II. (wv.) = ðȳwan. III.
(wv.) † _to perform, do_.

ðēona v. ðēoh.

ðeonan = ðanon

ðēonde pres. ptc. of ðēon I.

ðeonen = ðanon

ðēonest = ðēnest

ðēonȳd = ðēownȳd

ðēor m? _inflammation_? #Lcd#.

ðēorādl f. _inflammation_? _blistering heat_? #Lcd#.

ðeorcung = deorcung

ðēordrenc m. _a drink used for inflammation_, #Lcd#.

ðeorf (æ, e, o) I. adj. _unleavened_, _Æ, G, WW_: _fresh_? _skim_?
(_milk_), #Lcd#. II. n. _unleavened bread_, Æ. [‘_tharf_’]

ðeorfa = ðearfa

ðeorfdagas mp. _days of unleavened bread_, A 8·330.

ðeorfhlāf m. _loaf of unleavened bread_, Æ.

ðeorfling m. _unleavened bread_, WW.

ðeorfnes f. _freedom from leaven, purity_, Æ.

ðeorfsymbel n. _feast of unleavened bread_, Æ.

ðēorgerid n. _inflammation_? #Lcd# 187a.

ðeorscwold = ðerscold

ðēorwærc m. _inflammatory disease_? #Lcd# 45b.

ðēorwenn f. _inflammatory tumour or blister, carbuncle_, #Lcd# 123a.

ðēorwyrm m. _inflammatory (parasitic) worm_, #Lcd# 45a.

ðēorwyrt f. _ploughman’s spikenard, fleabane_, #Lcd#.

ðēos I. dem. pron., nom. fem. _this_. v. ðēs. II. gs. of ðēoh. III. gs.
of (ðēo =) ðēow.

ðeossa = ðissa

ðeossum = ðisum

ðēoster == ðēostor

ðēostor, ðēostre (īe, ī, ȳ) _dark, gloomy_, _B, BH_: _sad, mournful_.
[‘_thester_’]

ðēostorcofa † m. _dark chamber_.

ðēostorful _dark, dusky_, _Æ, Mt_ (ȳ). [‘_thesterfull_’]

ðēostorfulnes (ē, ȳ) f. _darkness_, OEG.

ðēostorlic _obscure, dark_, _Æ_ (e^2). [‘_thesterly_’]

ðēostorloca m. _tomb_, #El# 485.

ðēostornes (ǣ, ī, ȳ) f. _darkness_, _AO, Bo_. [‘_thesterness_’]

ðēostre = ðēostor, ðēostru

ðēostrian _to grow dark, become dim, be eclipsed_, _BH_: (±) _darken,
obscure_, _Bo, Mt_. [‘_thester_’]

ðēostrig _dark, obscure, blinded_, _GD_ (ȳ), _Mk_. [‘_thestri_’]

ðēostru f. (ī, īe, ȳ), ðēostre n. (often in pl.) _darkness, gloom_,
_BH_; Æ. [‘_thester_’]

ðēostrung f. _twilight, gloom_.

ðeosum = ðissum  [[form of “ðēs”]]

+ðēot I. n. _howling_, #Guth# 48^4. II. pres. 3 sg. of +ðēodan.

ðēotan^2 (ēa, ū) _to roar, howl_, _Æ, Bo, Met_: _sound forth, resound,
murmur_, _WW_. [‘_theoten_’]

ðēote f. _torrent, fountain, cataract, waterfall_: _conduit, pipe_, Æ.
[ðēotan]

ðēow I. fm. _servant, slave_, _AO, CP, DR, G_. II. adj. _servile_, _Æ,
AO, Bo, W_. [‘_theow_’]

ðēowa m. (Æ, CP) = ðēow I.

+ðēowa m. _enslaved person_, v. MFH 104.

ðēowæt = ðēowot

ðēowan I. = ðēowian. II. = ðȳwan

ðēowatdōm = ðēowotdōm

ðēow-boren, -berde _not free-born, born in servitude_.

ðēowcnapa m. _bondservant_, ÆH 2·510^27.

ðēowdōm m. _slavery, servitude, service, vassalage, subjection_, _Æ,
AO_; CP: _divine service_. [‘_theowdom_’]

ðēowdōmhād m. _service_, BH 480^10.

ðēowe f. _female slave, handmaiden_, _BH, MtL_ (ī). [‘_theow_’]

ðēowen, ðēowene = ðēowe

ðēowet (Æ) = ðēowot

ðēowetling m. _little servant or slave_, Æ.

ðēowhād m. _servitude, service_, BH.

ðēowian I. (±) (ēa) (w. d.) occl. pret. ðēowde _to serve, minister to,
be subject to_, _Bo, Lk, Mt_ (ē); AO, CP: _enslave, give over into
slavery_, Æ. [‘_theow_’] II. = ðȳwan I.

ðēowin = ðēowen

ðēowincel (īo) n. _little servant_, CVHy 3^3.

ðēowlic _servile_, #ÆGr# 55^1n.

ðēowne as. of ðēowen.

ðēownȳd (e^2) † f. _serfdom, slavery_.

ðēowot n. _service, ministry, servitude, bondage_, Æ, AO, CP.

ðēowotdōm m. _service_, CP.

ðēowotlic _of a slave, servile_, Æ (wt).

ðēowotling (e^2) m. _servant, slave_, Æ.

ðēowotscipe (wt) m. _service_, ÆH 23b^26.

ðēowracian _to threaten, menace_, #SPs# 102^9.

ðēowracu (Æ) = ðēowwracu

+ðēowrǣden (RB) = ðēodrǣden

ðēowt == ðēowot

ðēowð = ðēofð, ðīefð

ðēowu = ðēowe

ðēowut = ðēowot

ðēowwracu f. _commination, threat, threatening_, Æ.

ðeox _hunting-spear_, #HGl# 423.

ðēr == ðǣr

ðeran _to rush_, Cp 150#j#.

ðerc-, ðercs- = ðersc-

ðercan, ðerccan _to ‘thrash,’ ‘thresh,’ beat_, _WW_.

ðerexwold = ðerscold

ðerf = ðeorf

ðerflicnes (#KGl#) = ðearflicnes

ðerh (NG) == ðurh

ðērinne = ðǣrinne

ðērrihte = ðǣrrihte

+ðersc n. _thrashing, beating_, GD.

±ðerscan^3 (a, æ, ea, i, y) _to thresh_, _‘thrash,’ beat, strike_, _CP,
DR, Sol, WW_.

ðerscel (y) f. _flail_, _WW_. [‘_threshel_’]

ðerscelflōr f. _threshing-floor_, Mt 3^12.

ðersc-old, -wald, -wold, ðerx(w)old (æ, eo, i, y) m. _‘threshold,’
border, limit_, _Æ, Bo, WW_.

ðes = ðæs

ðēs (e?) m., ðēos f., ðis n. dem. pron. ‘_this_.’ beforan ðissum, ǣr
ðissum _before this, formerly_.

ðēster- = ðēostor-

ðēstrian = ðēostrian

ðet = ðæt

ðette = ðætte

ðēw- = ðēow-, ðȳw-

ðī = ðȳ

ðīada (#VPs# 134^15) = ðēoda gp. of ðēod.

+ðian = +ðēon

ðicce I. adj. _‘thick,’ viscous, solid_, _AO, Bo, Lcd, RB_: _dense,
stiff_, _Bo, CP, Lcd_: _numerous, abundant_, _AO_: _hazy, gloomy_, _Æ,
BH_. II. adv. _thickly, closely_, _Bl, Lcd, WW_: _often, frequently_,
_Gen_ 684.

ðiccet n. _thick bushes, ‘thicket,’_ _SPs_. [ðicce]

ðiccian tr., intr. _to thicken_, _Æ, WW_: _crowd together_, _Shr_.
[‘_thick_’]

ðiccnes = ðicnes

ðiccol, ðiccul _fat, corpulent_, WW.

ðicfeald _dense_, OEG 278.

+ðicfyldan _to make dense_, #Gl#.

±ðicgan^5 (and wv.) (a, æ, e, ea) _to take, receive, accept_, _Chr,
Lcd_: _partake of, consume, taste, eat, drink_, _Mk_; AO, CP.

ðiclīce _thickly, often, continually, frequently, in large numbers_, AO.

ðicnes f. _‘thickness,’ density, viscosity, hardness_, _GD, Lcd, SPs_:
_depth_: _anything thick or heavy (as clouds or rain)_, _LPs, ZDA_:
_thicket_: _darkness_.

ðīdan = ðyddan

ðider (æ, y) adv. _on that side_, _‘thither,’ whither_, _Æ, BH, Bl_ (y);
AO, CP. hider and ð. _or_. hidres ðidres (ðædres) _hither and thither_,
CP: _where, wherever_.

ðidercyme m. _a coming hither_, NC 327 (late).

ðidergeond _thither_, Æ.

ðiderinn (y^1, y^2) adv. _therein, into that place_.

ðiderlēodisc _to that people, native_, MH 178^25.

ðiderweard, ðiderweardes adv. _‘thitherwards,’ thither_, _Æ, AO, Bo_.

ðidres = ðider

ðīed- = ðēod-

ðieder (CP) = ðider

ðīef- = ðēof-

ðīefefeoh n. _stolen goods_, LL.

ðīefð (ē, ēo, ȳ) f. ‘_theft_,’ _Lcd_ (ȳ), _LL_: _stolen goods_, LL
(ðēoft). [ðēof]

+ðiegen = +ðigen

ðīen = ðȳwan

ðīende = ðēonde

ðīenen = ðīnen

ðienga = ðinga, gp. of ðing.

ðīestr- = ðēostr-

ðīf- = ðīef-, ðȳf-

ðigde, ðigede pret. 1, 3 sg. of ðicgan.

ðigen I. f. _receiving, taking (of food or drink)_, _eating_, Æ: _food
or drink_, Æ. [ðicgan] II. pp. of ðēon I. and ðicgan.

ðigeð pres. 3 sg. of ðicgan.

ðignen = ðīnen

ðīgon pret. pl. of ðēon I.

ðīhsl = ðīsl

ðihtig = ðyhtig

ðīhð pres. 3 sg. of ðēon I.

ðilc = ðyllic

ðile = ðyle

ðilian (e, y) _to lay with planks, board over_, Æ. [_Ger._ dielen]

ðilic = ðyllic

ðiling f. _boarding, floor_: _table_, GD 97^4.

ðille n. _thin board, plank, flooring_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ diele]

ðillian = ðilian

ðillic = ðyllic

ðimiama m. _incense_, Æ. [_L._ thymiama]

ðīn I. gs. of ðu. II. adj. pron. _‘thine,’ thy_. III. f. = ðigen

ðīnan _to grow moist_, #Lcd# 13b.

ðinc = ðing

ðincan = (1) ðyncan; (2) ðencan

+ðincðo = +ðyncðo

+ðind n. _swelling_, #Lcd#.

ðindan^3 _to swell, swell up_, Æ: (wrongly, through confusion betw.
‘tabescere’ and ‘tumescere’) _melt, pass away_, #PPs# 111^9; 118^158:
_be angry_.

ðīnen f. _maid-servant, handmaid_, Æ: _midwife_, Æ. [ðegn]

ðing n. _‘thing,’ creature_, _Æ, Lcd_: _object, property_, _Æ, Bo, Bl,
Lcd_: _cause, motive, reason_, _Æ_: _lawsuit_, _PPs_: _event, affair,
act, deed, enterprise_, _Æ, CP, Lcd, MtR_: _condition, circumstances_,
_Æ_: _contest, discussion, council, assembly_, _An, B, Cr, LL_: _court
of justice_, v. LL 2·449: _point, respect_, #Bl#. mid nānum ðingum adv.
_not at all_. for his ðingum _for his sake_. for ðisum ðingum _for this
reason_. be fullum ðingum _abundantly_. ǣnige ðinga _anyhow, in any way,
somehow_. raðost ðinga _at the earliest_. ælces ðinges _entirely, in
every respect_.

ðingan _to invite, address_? #Gl#.

+ðingan = +ðēon

+ðinge n. _meeting, council_: _agreement, covenant_: _fate_.

ðingemann m. (_Danish_) _mercenary_.  [[from first edition]]

±ðingere m. _advocate, intercessor, mediator, priest_, #Gl#, CP.

ðingestre f. _female advocate, mediatrix_, HL 10^698.

ðinggemearc n. † _reckoning of time, allotted time_.

ðingian (w. d.) _to beg, pray, ask, intercede for_, _LL, Sat_; CP: _come
to terms, covenant, conciliate, compound with, settle_: (refl.)
_reconcile oneself (with)_: _determine, purpose, design_: _talk,
harangue_. [‘_thing_’]

ðinglēas _free (from sin or crime)_, LL 412.

ðingmann = ðingemann

ðingrǣden f. _intercession, pleading, mediation, intervention_, Æ.

+ðingsceat m. _ransom_, CP 339^10.

ðingstede † m. _meeting-place, place of assembly_.

ðingstōw f. _meeting-place, place of council_: _place where ways meet,
village_: _market_.

+ðingðo = +ðyncðo

ðingum adv. (instr. pl. of ðing) _purposely_.

±ðingung f. _advocacy, intercession, mediation_, Æ, CP.

ðinn- = ðynn-

ðīnne asm. of ðīn II.

ðīnnen = ðīnen

ðinra = ðynra comp. of ðynne.

ðīnra gp. of ðīn II.

ðint pres. 3 sg. of ðindan.

ðīo = ðēo

ðio- = ðeo-

ðīr f. _a female servant_, JnLR 18^17. [_ON._ ðīr]

ðird- (_NG_) = ðrid-

ðīre = ðīnre gdsf. of ðīn II.

ðirel == ðyrel

ðirl- = ðyrl-

ðirnet = ðyrniht

ðirsceflōr, ðirscelflōr == ðerscelflōr

ðirsceð pres. 3 sg. of ðerscan.

ðirscwald = ðerscold

ðirst = ðurst

ðis v. ðēs.

ðisa = ðissa gp. of ðēs.

ðisan = ðisum dsmn. of ðēs.

ðises gsmn. of ðēs.

ðīsl f., ðīsle f. _waggon-pole, pole, shaft_. [_Ger._ deichsel]

ðislic = ðyllic

ðism = dism

ðisne as. of ðēs.

ðison = ðisum dsmn. of ðēs.

ðissa gp., ðisse, ðissere gdsf.; ðisson, ðissum dsmn. and dp. of ðēs.

ðistel m. ‘_thistle_,’ _Gl, WW_ (y); Mdf.

ðistelgeblǣd n. _blister caused by thistle_, #Lcd# 162b.

ðisteltwige f. _a kind of bird, goldfinch_? _linnet_? #Gl#.

ðīsternes (CP) = ðēostornes

ðīstr- = ðēostr-

ðīstra m. _trace, article of harness_? WW.

ðisum dsmn. and dp. of ðēs.

ðiðer = ðider

ðīustr- (Cp) = ðēostr-

ðīwan = ðȳwan

ðīwen, ðīwon = ðēowen

ðīwwracu = ðēowwracu

ðīxl (#Gl#) = ðīsl

ðō f. _clay, loam_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ ton]

ðocerian, ðocrian _to run up and down_, WW.

ðoddettan _to strike, push_, W.

ðoden (ō?) n. _whirlwind, high wind, whirlpool_, _Æ, Cp, CP, Chr_.
[‘_thode_’]

ðōdor = ðōðor

ðoft, ðofte f. _bench for rowers_, _WW_. [‘_thoft_’]

+ðofta m. _comrade, mate_, Æ, AO.

+ðoftian _to join, unite, associate_ (wið), AO.

±ðoftrǣden f. _fellowship_, Æ.

±ðoftscipe m. _companionship_.

+ðogen _virtuous, excellent_. [pp. of ðēon]

ðōh (#Gl#) = tōh

ðōhe f. _clay_, #Gl# (= ðō).

±ðōht (+ exc. N) mn. _process of thinking, ‘thought,’_ _LL_: _mind_,
_Gl_: _a thought, idea_, _MtR_: _compassion, ‘viscera,’_ LkLR 1^78.
[ðencan]

+ðohta = +ðofta

ðōhte pret. 3 sg. of ðencan.

ðōiht _clayey_, WW 348^11.

ðol m. _‘thole,’ oar-pin_, _Cp, WW_.

ðolebyrde _patient_, _Sc_. [‘_tholeburde_’]

ðolebyrdnes f. _endurance_, _Sc_ 3^8 (i^2). [‘_tholeburdness_’]

ðolemōd = ðolmōd

±ðolian _to suffer, endure, undergo_, _An, B, Gen, MkL_; AO, CP:
_allow_, _KC_: _persevere, hold out_ (intr.), _survive_: (w. g.) _to
lose, lack, forfeit, be without, dispense with_, Æ. [‘_thole_’]

ðoll = ðol

ðolle f. _saucepan_, OEG 4115.

ðolmōd I. _forbearing, patient_, _Æ, Sc, OEG_. II. m. _patience_? ÆL
1·16^334#d#. [‘_tholemode_’]

ðolmōdnes f. _forbearance, patience_, _Æ_. [‘_tholemodeness_’]

ðolo- = ðol(e)-

ðon I. instr. sing. of sē. II. adv. _then, now_: _thence_: (in negative
clauses, with comparatives) _in comparison with_: _inasmuch as, when_.
æfter ðon _after that_. ǣr ðon _before that_ (antequam). nō ðon lange...
_not long until..._. tō ðon _to that extent_. III. (#VPs#) = ðonne

ðōn = ðǣm

ðonan = ðanon

ðonc = ðanc

ðone asm. of sē _the, that_.

ðonēcan = ðanēcan

ðonen = ðanon

ðong == ðanc

ðonne (a, æ) adv. and conj. _then_, _AO_; CP: _therefore, wherefore_:
_yet_: _while, when_: _thereafter, henceforth_: _rather than_, _Ps_:
_since_: _although_: (with comparatives) ‘_than_,’ Æ, CP. ðonne...ðonne
_when...then_. ð. hwæðere _yet, nevertheless_. ð. gȳt _as yet, even_.
ð. ðe _since_.

ðonon = ðanon

Ðor m. _Thor_, #Lcd#, W.

ðorf (NG) = ðeorf

ðorfæst _useful_, NG. [ðearf]

ðorfend == ðearfend

ðorfte pret. 3 sg. of ðurfan.

ðorh (#VPs#) == ðurh

ðorhniht = ðorniht

ðorlēas _useless_, NG. [ðearf]

ðorn m. _‘thorn,’ thorn-bush_, _Æ, Bo, G, Gl_; CP; Mdf: _name of the
rune for =ð=_, _Run_.

ðorncynn n. _a kind of thorn_.

ðorngeblǣd n. _blister caused by a thorn_, #Lcd# 162b.

ðornian _to lose_, v. MF 174.

ðornig ‘_thorny_,’ _Æ, WW_.

ðorn-iht, -eht(e) _thorny_.

ðorning m. _thorny place_, BC 1·480^8 (Mdf).

ðornrind f. _thorn-bark_, #Lcd# 19a.

ðorof (_MtL_) = ðeorf

ðorp (ðrop) m. _farm_: _village_, _Cp, Ep, WW_ (ro). [‘_thorp_’]

ðorscen pp. of ðerscan.

ðost m. _dung_, #Lcd#.

+ðōt = +ðēot

ðoterian _to cry, howl, lament_, Æ(o^2).

ðoterung f. _groaning, wailing_, Æ.

ðotor-, ðotr- = ðoter-

ðōð (#Chr# 1135) = ðēah I.

ðōðor, ðōðer m. _ball_.

ðox = dox

ðrā = ðrēa

+ðracen _prepared, decked_, Æ.

ðracian _to fear, dread, shun_, RHy 9^50.

ðracu † f., gs. ðræce _pressure, fury, storm, violence_: _onrush,
attack_.

±ðræc (usu. +) n. _throng, force, violence_: _equipment_, OEG.

ðræcheard _brave in battle_, #El# 123.

ðræchwīl f. _time of misery_, #Jul# 554.

ðræcian = ðracian

ðræcrōf _keen in fight_, #Gen# 2030.

ðræcswald = ðerscold

ðræcwīg m. _violent combat_, #Ex# 182.

ðræcwudu m. _spear_, B 1246 (e^1).

ðrǣd (ē) m. ‘_thread_,’ _Bo, Lcd_; Æ.

+ðræf n. _rebuke, censure_, NC 297?

+ðrǣf (on) _unanimously_.

ðræft n. _contentiousness_, #Mod# 42.

ðrǣgan † _to run_.

ðrǣging = ðrēagung

ðrǣl (ēa) m. _serf, ‘thrall,’_ _LL, NG_.

ðrǣlriht n. _serf’s right_, W 158^15.

ðrǣs (ē) _fringe, hem_, #Gl#.

ðrǣscan = ðrǣstan

ðræsce (_Cp_) = ðrysce

ðræst = dærst

±ðrǣstan _to writhe, twist, press, force_, _BH_: _crush, oppress,
torment_. [v. ‘_threst_,’ ‘_i-thrast_’]

+ðrǣstednes f. _contrition_, GD, WW.

ðrǣstnes f. _trouble, pain, grief_: (+) _contrition_.

ðrǣstung f. _affliction, torment_, CP 317^7.

ðrǣwen = ðrāwen pp. of ðrāwan.

ðrǣwung = ðrēagung

ðræxwold = ðerscold

ðrafian _to restrain, reprove_, CP: _urge, push, press_, Æ.

ðrafung f. _reproof, correction_, CP.

ðrāg f. _space of time, time, while, period, season_, _Gen, Jul_:
_occasion_, _B, Bl, Bo_: _evil times_: _paroxysm_. ðrāge _for a time,
some time, long time_. ðrāgum _at times, sometimes_. ealle ðrāge _all
the time, continually_. [‘_throw_’]

ðrāgbysig _long busy_? #Rd# 5^1.

ðrāglic (ðrah-) _long-continued_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

ðrāgmǣlum _at times, sometimes_.

ðrāh == ðrāg

ðrāll = ðrēal, ðrǣl

ðrang pret. 3 sg. of ðringan.

±ðrang n. _throng, crowd, tumult_.

±ðrāwan^7 _to turn, twist, curl_, _Æ, WW_; CP: _rack_. [‘_throw_’]

ðrāwingspinl f. _crisping-pin_, OEG.

ðrāwu (#Gl#) = ðrēa

ðrē = ðrēo

ðrēa I. mfn. _threat, menace, abuse_, CP: _rebuke, castigation_:
_oppression, attack_: _calamity, throe_. [ðrēowan] II. imperat. of
ðrēagan.

ðreacs = ðreax

ðrēade pret. 1, 3 sg. of ðrēagan.

±ðrēagan, ðrēawian (ē) _to rebuke, chastise, correct, punish_, _CP, Mt_;
Æ: _threaten, menace_: _attack, oppress, torture, afflict, vex, harass_.
[‘_threa_’]

ðrēagend m. _reprover_, OEG 5380.

ðrēagung (ǣ, ēaw-) f. _threatening, reproof, correction_.

ðreahs = ðreax

ðrēal I. f. _discipline, correction, punishment_, Æ: _reproof_:
_threat_. II. = ðrǣl

ðrēalic † _severe, terrible, calamitous_.

ðrēan (Æ) = ðrēagan

ðrēanēd == ðrēanīed

ðrēang = ðrēagung

ðrēanīed † f. _affliction, misery, distress, calamity_.

ðrēanīedla (ē^2, y^2) † m. _affliction, misfortune_.

ðrēanīedlic _calamitous_, #Jul# 128.

ðrēanȳd == ðrēanīed

ðrēapian _to reprove, correct_, CP 165^17. [‘_threap_’]

ðrēapung f. _reproof_, CP 167^14.

ðrēat I. (ēo) m. _press, crowd, throng, host, troop_, _B, El, Mk_:
_oppression, coercion, calamity_, _Bl, Jul_: _threatening_? _Æ_.
[‘_threat_’] II. pret. 3 sg. of ðrēotan.

ðrēatend m. _violent person_, MtL.

ðrēatian _to urge, press, force, attack, harass_, _Æ, Cp, MH, Mt_:
_threaten_, _PPs_: _reprove, rebuke_, Æ, CP. [‘_threat_’]

ðrēatmǣlum (ē) adv. _in swarms_.

ðrēatnes f. _affliction, tribulation_, NC 327.

ðrēatnian (Æ) = ðrēatian. [‘_threaten_’]

ðrēatung f. _threatening, compulsion, ill-usage_, AO: _correction,
reproof_, CP.

ðrēaung = ðrēagung

ðrēaw pret. 3 sg. of ðrēowan.

ðrēawend = ðrōwend

ðrēaweorc n. _misery_, #Gen# 737. [_OS._]

ðrēawian = ðrēagian  [[headword spelled “ðrēagan”]]

ðrēawung = ðrēagung

ðreax (e) _rottenness, rubbish, refuse_, #Bas# 48^20; ÆL 35^150. [_ON._
ðrekkr; v. ES 43·332]

ðrec == ðræc

ðrece m. _oppression, force_: _weariness_. [ðracu]

ðrecswald = ðerscold

ðrēd (_Cp_) = ðrǣd

+ðrēgan = +ðrēan

ðrēgian = ðrǣgan

ðrehtig = ðrohtig

ðremm == ðrymm

ðrēo v. ðrīe.

ðreo- = ðri-

±ðreodian (y) _to think over, deliberate_: _meditate_.

ðreodung f. _deliberation, consideration_: _scruple, hesitation_.

ðreohtig = ðrohtig

ðrēohund n. _three hundred_, Æ.

ðrēohundwintre _of the age of three hundred years_, Æ.

ðreom v. ðrīe.

ðreoniht f. _period of three days_, #Pa# 38.

ðrēora v. ðrīe.

ðreosellic = ðrisellic

ðrēostru = ðēostru

ðrēot = ðrēat

ðrēotan^2 _to vex, weary_, AS 46^2.

ðrēotēoða ‘_thirteenth_,’ _Æ, MH_ (-tegða), _Mt_ (y^1); AO.

ðrēotīne ‘_thirteen_,’ _BH_ (e^2), #Men# (y^2).

ðrēotīnegeare _thirteen years old_, MH 216^16.

ðrēott- = ðrēot-

ðrēow I. pret. 3 sg. of ðrāwan. II. = ðrīe

ðrēowan^2 _to suffer, strive for_. [ðrea]  [[from first edition]]

ðrēowian = ðrōwian

ðreoxwold = ðerscold

ðrep? ‘_fornix_,’ Ln 34^59 (drep).

ðrepel = ðrypel  [[headword spelled “ðrȳpel”]]

ðrerēðre = ðrirēðre

ðrēs = ðrǣs

ðrescan = ðerscan

ðrescold, ðrescwald = ðerscold

ðrēst- = ðrǣst-

ðrēt = (1) ðrēat; (2) ðrǣd

ðrēung = ðrēaung

ðrex = ðreax

ðrex- = ðersc-

ðrī = ðrīe

ðria = ðriwa

ðribeddod (y) _three-bedded, having three couches_, WW 184^24.

ðriccan = ðryccan

ðridæglic (eo, y) adj. _lasting three days_, BH 350^32.

ðridǣled (eo, y) _tripartite_, OEG.

ðridda (y) num. adj. ‘_third_,’ _Bl, Cr, Lcd_; AO, CP. ðridde healf _two
and a half_.

ðridung = ðreodung

ðrīe (ī, ȳ) num. nam.; nafn. ðrēo; gmfn. ðrēora; dmfn. ðrim (ðreom)
‘_three_.’

ðrie- = ðri-

ðrīeste = ðrīste adv.  [[under “ðrīst”]]

ðrīetan _to weary_: _force_.

ðrifeald _threefold_.

ðrifealdan _to multiply by three, increase threefold_.
  [[from first edition]]

ðrifealdlic _threefold, triple_. adv. -līce _in three ways_.

ðrifeoðor = ðrifeðor

ðrifēte ‘_three-footed_,’ _ÆGr_.

ðrifeðor _triangular_, #Gl#.

ðrifingre (v) _three fingers broad or thick_, LL 110[49,3].

ðriflēre (y) _three-storied_, ÆH 2·70^17.

ðri-fotede, -fotad ‘_three-footed_,’ _WW_ (y).

ðrifyldan = ðrifealdan

ðrifyrede _three-furrowed_, #ÆGr# 288^12n.

ðrig = ðrīe

ðriga = ðriwa

ðrigǣrede _three-pronged_, #ÆGr# 288^10 (eo).

ðrigēare _three years old_: _space of three years_.

ðrigylde I. adj. _subject to threefold payment, or compensation_, LL.
II. adv. LL.

ðrihēafdede ‘_three-headed_,’ _ÆGr_ 67^11 (y).

ðrihing == ðriðing

ðrihīwede _having three forms_, #ÆGr# 287^10 (y).

ðrihlidede _having three openings_, #ÆGr# 288^6 (y).

ðri-hyrne, -hyrnede (eo) _three-cornered_.

ðrilēfe _three-leaved_. as sb. = _trefoil_? _wood-sorrel_? WW
133^22 (y).

ðrilen (WW 151^34, y), ðrilig, ðrili adj. _woven with three threads_,
_Cp, Ln, WW_; LV. [‘_thrile_’]

ðrilic _triple, threefold_, VHy (y).

ðrilīðe n. _year with an extra month_ (_a third, named_ līða).

ðrim I. = ðrymm. II. v. ðrīe.

ðrim- = ðrym-

ðrimen (y) _a third part_, #Lcd# 47a.

ðri-meolce, -milce n. _May_.

ðrims, ðrimse = trymes

ðrindan = ðrintan

ðrinen (y) _three-fold_.

Ðrines f. _Trinity_, _Æ, BH_. [‘_threeness_,’ ‘_thrinness_’]

+ðring n. _crowd, pressure, commotion_, _An_; ÆL (y). [v. ‘_thring_’]

±ðringan^3 _to press, squeeze, crowd upon, throng_, _An, Mk, Ph_: _press
forward, rush on, hasten, advance_, _AO_: _oppress_: (+) _pinch (with
cold)_. [‘_thring_’]

ðrinihte _three days old_, #Lcd#.

ðrinna _three-fold, three times_, _LL_. [‘_thrin_’]

Ðrinnes (Æ) = Ðrines

ðrintan^3 _to swell_, #Mod# 24.

ðrīo = ðrēo. v. ðrīe.

ðrīostr- (#KGl#) = ðēostr-

ðrirēðre _with three rows of oars_. as sb. _trireme_, AO (īe).

ðrisce = ðrysce

ðriscelflōr = ðerscelflōr

ðriscȳte (ȳ^1) _triangular_, AO. [scēat]

ðrisellic _tripartite_, #Nar# 35^29 (eo^1).

ðrislite _tripod, three-forked_, A 4·151 (ie?).

ðrisnæcce (y^1, e^2) _three-forked_, #ÆGr# 288^12.

ðrīsnes = ðrīstnes

ðrīst, ðrīste I. adj. _daring, rash, bold_: _audacious, shameless_, _CP,
W_. II. adv. _boldly, daringly_. [‘_thriste_’; _Ger._ dreist]

ðrīstelic = ðrīstiglic

ðrīstful _presumptuous_, A 13·369.

ðrīsthycgende † _brave-minded_.

ðrīsthȳdig † _bold, valorous_.

+ðrīstian _to dare, presume_.

ðrīstiglic _rash, bold, daring_. adv. -līce.

±ðrīstlǣcan _to presume, dare_, CP.

ðrīstlǣcnes f. _boldness_, GD.

+ðrīstlǣcung f. _presumption_, MF 164.

ðrīstlēasnes f. _want of boldness_? A 11·101.

ðristlic == ðrīstiglic

ðrīstling m. _bold person_? (BT), _thrush_ (Mdf), EC 450^15.

ðrīstlong m. _very long_? (or = ðristling?) BC 3·618.

ðrīstnes f. _rashness, boldness_.

ðrīstra = ðīstra

ðristrenge (eo, y) _three-stringed_, #ÆGr# 288^10.

ðrīt (Æ) pres. 3 sg. of ðrīetan.

ðrītig ‘_thirty_,’ _B, Bl_; AO, CP.

ðrītigfeald ‘_thirtyfold_,’ _Mt_.

ðrītigoða ‘_thirtieth_,’ _ÆGr_ (tt), _BH_.

ðrītigwintre _thirty years old_, Æ.

ðrittēoða = ðrēotēoða

ðrittig == ðrītig

ðrīð == ðrȳð

ðriðing _third part of a county, riding_, LL (late).

ðriðinggerēfa m. _governor or sheriff of a_ ‘ðriðing,’ LL (late).

ðriwa adv. _thrice_, _Mk, RB_; AO. [‘_thrie_’]

ðriwin-tre, -tra, -ter _three years old_, _WW_. [v. ‘_thrinter_’]

ðroc n. _table_, Mk 11^15: _piece of wood on which the ploughshare is
fixed_.

ðroehtig = ðrohtig

ðrōh I. ‘_rancor_,’ #Gl#. II. ‘_rancidus_,’ OEG.

ðroht † I. m. _exertion, labour, endurance, toil, trouble, suffering_.
II. adj. _dire, troublesome, tormenting_.

ðrohtheard † _strong in enduring_: _hard to endure_.

ðrohtig (e? eo) _enduring, persistent, persevering, laborious_.

ðrong = ðrang pret. 3 sg. of ðringan.

ðrop = ðorp

ðrosle = ðrostle

ðrosm m. _smoke, vapour_, Æ.

ðrosmig _vaporous, smoky_, W 138^26.

ðrostle (ō?) f. _‘throstle,’ thrush_, _BC, Cp, GD_.

ðrota (WW 306^13) = ðrote

ðrotbolla m. _gullet, windpipe, larynx_, _Æ, Gl, LL_. [‘_throatboll_’]

ðrote, ðrotu f. ‘_throat_,’ _Æ, Bo, WW_.

ðroten pp. of ðrēotan.

ðrotu (Æ) = ðrote

ðrōung = ðrōwung

ðrowen pp. of ðrēowan.

ðrōwend m. _serpent, scorpion, basilisk_, Æ.

ðrōwend- = ðrōwiend-

ðrōwere m. _sufferer, martyr_.

ðrōwerhād, ðrōwethād m. _martyrdom_, GD.

±ðrōwian (o?) _to endure, suffer, die_, _Æ, B Bl, Bo_; AO, CP: _pay for,
atone for_. [‘_throw_’]

ðrowiendhād (e^2) m. _martyrdom_, GD 231^8#c#.

ðrōw-iendlic, -igendlic _suffering, enduring, passive_, Æ. ð. dēað
_apoplexy_.

ðrōwung f. _suffering_, _Æ, CP_: _passion, martyrdom_: _painful
symptom_: _anniversary of martyrdom_. [‘_throwing_’]

ðrōwungrǣding f. _reading about martyrs, martyrology_, CM 286.

ðrōwung-tīd f., -tīma n. _time of suffering_.

+ðrūen pp. of ðweran.

ðrūh fmn. _pipe, trough_, _Gl, MH_: _chest_: _tomb, coffin_, _Æ, BH_.
[‘_through_’]

ðrum = ðrim v. ðrīe.

-ðrum v. tunge-ð. [‘_thrum_’]

ðrungen pp., ðrungon pret. pl. of ðringan.

-ðrūt v. fisc-ð.

ðrūtigende _strutting, bouncing_, Æ: _threatening_, ÆL 10^273.

ðruton pret. pl. of ðrēotan.

ðrūtung _anger, pride_: _threatening_, ÆL 7^76.

ðruðhorn = truðhorn  [[headword spelled “trūðhorn”]]

ðrȳ = ðrīe, ðrī

±ðryccan pret., ðrycte, ðryhte (tr.) _to trample on, crush, oppress,
afflict_, _Bo_; CP: (intr.) _press, push_, _Gu_. [‘_thrutch_’]

+ðryccednes f. _distress, trouble_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

ðrycnes f. _tribulation, affliction_, MtR.

ðrydda = ðridda

+ðrȳde pret. 3 sg. of +ðrȳn.

+ðrȳdfullod ‘_elatus_,’ #RPs# 130^1.

ðrydian = ðreodian

ðrȳdig = ðrȳðig

ðrȳdlīce = ðrȳðlīce

ðrydung = ðreodung

ðrȳh = ðrūh

ðryhte pret. 3 sg. of ðryccan.

ðryl = ðyrl, ðyrel

+ðrȳl n. _crowd, multitude_, ÆL 23^92. [ðrȳn]

ðrym = (1) ðrymm; (2) ðrim

ðrymcyme m. _glorious coming_, #Gu# 1230.

ðrymcyning † m. _glorious king, king of glory, God_.

ðrymdōm m. _glory_, W 254^14#d#.

ðrymen = ðrimen

ðrymfæst † _glorious, illustrious, noble, mighty_.

ðrymful † _glorious, majestic, peerless_.

ðrymilce = ðrimeolce

ðrymlic _glorious, magnificent_, AO: _powerful, mighty_. adv. -līce.

ðrymm m. _multitude, host, troop_, _ÆL, Cr_: _torrent_: _force, power,
might, ability_: _glory, majesty, splendour_, _CP_. [‘_thrum_’]

ðrymma m. _brave man, hero_, #An# 1141.

ðrymme, ðrymmum adv. _powerfully, violently_.

ðrymrīce n. _realm of glory, heaven_, #Bl# 105^11.

ðrymsa = trymes

ðrym-seld n., -setl (Æ) n. _seat of honour, throne_.

ðrymsittende † ptc. _sitting in glory, dwelling in heaven_.

ðrymwealdend I. adj. _all-ruling_. II. m. _lord of glory_.

+ðrȳn _to press, bind_, v. NC 328.

ðrync (AO 76^34) = drinc, imperat. of drincan.

ðrynen = ðrinen

Ðrynes = Ðrines

ðryng sb. _conduit, channel_? (= ðring?) WW 198^14.

Ðrynnes (Æ) = Ðrines

ðryosm = ðrosm

ðrȳpel (ē) m. _instrument of torture, cross_? WW 225^41. [ðrēapian]

ðrȳpelūf ‘_eculeus_,’ ‘_catasta_,’ WW 180^13.

+ðryscan _to weigh down, afflict, oppress_, CP. [ðerscan]

ðrysce (æ, i, y) ‘_thrush_,’ _WW_.

ðryscel- = ðerscel-

±ðrysman, +ðrysmian _to press, oppress, stifle_, AO. [ðrosm]

ðryssce = ðrysce

ðrȳst == ðrīst

ðrȳst- = ðēost-

ðrȳt pres. 3 sg. of ðrēotan.

ðrȳð † f. (often in pl.) _might, power, force, strength_: _majesty,
glory, splendour_: _multitude, troop, host_.

ðrȳðærn n. _noble house, palace_, B 657.

ðrȳðbearn n. _strong youth_, #An# 494.

ðrȳðbord n. _strong shield_, #El# 151.

ðrȳðcyning m. _king of glory, God_, #An# 436.

ðrȳðful † _strong, brave_.

ðrȳðgesteald ‡ n. _splendid dwelling, palace_.

ðrȳðig _mighty, strong_, #Gen# 1986?

ðrȳðlic _strong, valiant_. adv. -līce(?).

ðrȳðo = ðrȳð

ðrȳðswȳð † n. _mighty, powerful_, B.

ðrȳðu = ðrȳð

ðrȳðum _very, violently_.

ðrȳðweorc n. _mighty work_, #An# 774.

ðrȳðword n. _lofty discourse_, B 643.

ðu (ū) pron. 2 pers., gs. ðīn, das. ðe, ðec; dual n. git, gīt, g. incer,
d. inc, a. incit, inc; np. gē, gīe, gp. ēower, dp. ēow, ap. ēowic, ēow
‘_thou_.’

ðūf m. _tuft_: _banner, standard, crest_. [_L._ tufa]

+ðūf _thriving, luxuriant_, WW.

ðūfbǣre _leafy_, OEG 2222.

ðūfeðistel = ðūðistel

ðūfian _to shoot forth, grow luxuriantly_, WW 408^2.

ðūfig _leafy_, WW 408^3.

ðūft m. _thicket_, WW 408^14.

ðugon pret. pl. of ðēon.

+ðūhsian _to make misty, dark_, W 137^9.

ðūhte pret. 3 sg. of ðyncan.

+ðuhtsum _abundant_, MH 138^15.

ðullic = ðyllic

ðūma m. ‘_thumb_,’ _Ep, Lcd, LL_.

ðumle sbpl. _entrails_, Cp 210#u#.

+ðun n. _loud noise_, #PPs# 45^3.

ðunar = ðunor

ðunden pp. of ðindan.

ðunelic = ðunorlic

ðuner = ðunor

ðuner- = ðun(o)r-

ðung m. _a poisonous plant, wolf’s-bane, aconite, nightshade_? #Gl#.

+ðungen _full grown, thriven_: _competent, excellent, distinguished,
virtuous_, ÆL. [pp. of ðēon]

+ðungenlīce adv. _virtuously, soberly_.

±ðungennes f. _growth_: _goodness, excellence, virtue, perfection_.

ðunian _to stand out, be prominent_: _be proud_: _roar, thunder, crash,
groan_.

ðunnung = ðūnung  [[error for “ðunung”?]]

ðunnur = ðunor

ðunor (e^2, u^2) m., gs. ðun(o)res ‘_thunder_,’ _AO, Cp, Jn, Rd_:
_thunderclap_, _Lcd_: _the god Thunder, Thor_: ‘_Jupiter_,’ _WW_; WW.

ðunor- = ðunr-

ðunorbodu f. _sea-bream_? WW 180^34.

ðunorclǣfre f. _bugle (plant)_, #Lcd#.

ðunorlic (e^2) _thundery_, OEG.

ðunorrād f. _thunder, thundering_, Æ.

ðunorrādlic _thundering_, #HGl# 451^46.

ðunorrādstefn f. _voice of thunder_, #PPs# 76^14.

ðunorwyrt f. _thunder-wort, houseleek_, #Lcd#.

ðunresdæg m. ‘_Thursday_,’ Æ; _LL_.

ðunresniht f. _the eve of Thursday, Wednesday night_.

±ðunrian _to ‘thunder,’_ _Bo, Jn_ (impers.); _PPs_ (pers.).

ðunring f. _thundering_, #Chr# 1085.

ðunung f. _creaking, noise, din_, WW.

ðunur = ðunor

ðunur- = ðun(o)r-

ðun-wang (e, o), -wange (æ, e) f. (n?) _temple (of the head)_, _Æ, WW_.
[‘_thunwang_’]

Ður = Ðor

ðuren = ðworen pp. of ðweran.

ðuresdæg = ðunresdæg

ðurfan swv. pres. 1, 3 sg. ðearf, pl. ðurfon; pret. sg. ðorfte; subj.
pres. ðurfe, ðyrfe _to need, be required_: _must, have occasion to_,
_Gen, LL_; CP: _want, be needy_: _be under an obligation, owe_.
[‘_tharf_’; ðearf]

ðurg = ðurh prep.

ðurh (e, o) I. prep. (w. d. a. g.) (space) _‘through’ (‘thorough’)_,
_G_: (time) _through, during_, _PPs_: (causal: agent, means, instrument)
_through, by means of, in consequence of, because of_, _BH, Bl, G, Gen_.
ðurh ealle _entirely_: (manner) _in, with, by, in conformity with_: _for
the sake of, in the name of_, _Sat_: (end, aim) _with a view to, on
behalf of_. II. adv. _through, throughout_, _PPs_.

ðūrh = ðrūh

ðurhbeorht _very bright, transparent, radiant, clear_, Æ.

ðurhbiter _thoroughly bitter, sour, perverse_, #CERPs# 77^8.

ðurhblāwan^7 _to inspire, animate_, CM 370.

ðurhborian _to bore through_.

ðurhbrecan^4 _to break through_, Æ.

ðurhbregdan^3 _to draw through, transport_.

ðurhbrengan _to bring through_, #LPs# 77^13.

ðurhbrūcan^2 _to enjoy fully_, WW 98^1.

ðurhburnen _thoroughly burnt_, #Lcd# 165b.

ðurhclǣnsian _to cleanse thoroughly_, MtR 3^12.

ðurhcrēopan^2 _to creep through, pass through_, #Bo# 93^5.

ðurhdelfan^3 _to dig through, pierce_, Æ.

ðurhdōn 1. _to go through, work through, finish, accomplish_.
2. _to make to pass through_.  [[from first edition]]

ðurhdrencan _to saturate_, #Kl# 17^148.

ðurhdrēogan^2 _to work through, accomplish, pass (time)_, CM.

ðurhdrīfan^1 _to drive or push through, strike_: _pierce, perforate_:
_penetrate, imbue_.

ðurhdūfan^2 _to dive through_, B 1619.

ðurhendian (e^1) _to accomplish, perfect_, LL 411[2,2].

ðurhetan^5 _to eat through, consume_.

ðurhfǣre = ðurhfēre

ðurhfæstnian _to transfix_, JnLR 19^37.

ðurhfaran^6 _to pass through, traverse, penetrate, pierce_, CP.

ðurhfarennes f. inner chamber, #ASPs# 104^28.

ðurhfēran _to pass through, traverse, penetrate_, _BH_.
[‘_thoroughfare_’]

ðurhfēre I. _penetrable_. II. n. _secret chamber_.

ðurhflēon^2 _to fly through_, BH 136^1.

ðurhfōn^7 _to penetrate_, B 1504.

ðurh-gān anv., pret. -ēode _to go through, pass through, penetrate_,
_Æ_. [‘_throughgo_’]

ðurhgangan^7 = ðurhgān

ðurhgedōn = ðurhdōn

ðurhgefeht n. _war_, Cp 205#p# (o^1).

ðurhgēotan^2 _to fill entirely, imbue, saturate, impregnate_.

ðurhglēdan _to heat through_, #Da# 244.

ðurhhǣlan _to heal thoroughly_, #Lcd#.

ðurhhālig _most holy_.

ðurhhefig _very heavy_, GD 104^26.

ðurhholod _bored through_, OEG 4035.

ðurhhwīt _quite white_, WW 163^6.

ðurhiernan^3 _to run through, traverse, pierce_, Æ.

ðurhlǣdan _to lead forth, conduct_.

ðurelǣran _to persuade_, #Sc# 38^12.

ðurhlǣred _very learned, skilled_, WW 118^23.

ðurhlāð _very hateful_, WW 130^28.

ðurhlēor-an, -ian _to penetrate_, GD, #JVPs#.

ðurhlōcung f. _preface, introduction_, WW 172^38.

ðurhrǣsan _to rush through_, #Rd# 4^36.

ðurhscēotan^2 _to shoot through, pierce_, Æ, AO.

ðurhscīnan _to shine through, be transparent_, _WW_ 148^7 (y).
[‘_throughshine_’]

ðurhscīnendlic _illustrious, splendid_, #LPs# 15^6.

ðurhscrīðan^1 _to go through, traverse_: _examine, consider_.

ðurhscyldig _very guilty_, Æ.

ðurhscȳne = ðurhscīne  [[form of “ðurhscīnan”?]]

ðurhsēcan _to search through, inquire thoroughly into_, _Sc_ 209^3.
[‘_throughseek_’]

ðurhsēon^5 _to look through, examine_: _penetrate_, _Bo_.
[‘_thoroughsee_’]

ðurhslēan^6 _to strike or pierce through_, Æ: _attack, afflict, kill_.

ðurhsmēagan _to search thoroughly, investigate, think out_.

ðurhsmūgan^2 _to pierce, bore through, eat through_: _go through
carefully_.

ðurhsmyrian _to smear, anoint_, W 229^3.

ðurhspēdig _very rich_, ÆH 1·502^8.

ðurhsticcian _to transfix_, JnL 19^37 (o^1).

ðurhstingan^3 _to pierce through, thrust through, prick_, Æ, CP.

ðurhstrang _very strong_, OEG 50^25.

ðurhswimman^3 _to swim through_, WW 52^1.

ðurhswīðan _to prevail_, #LPs# 51^9.

ðurhswōgan _to penetrate_, BH 430^5 (v.l.).

ðurhsȳne _limpid, transparent_, OEG 23^35.

ðurhtēon^2 _to carry or put through_: _finish, fulfil, carry out,
effect_, Æ, AO, CP: _draw, drag_: _continue_: _afford_: _undergo_.

ðurhtogennes f. _a religious reading at monastic mealtimes_, RBL 118^7.

ðurhtrymman _to confirm_, JnLR 10^25 (e^1).

ðurhðrāwan _to twist through_.

ðurh-ðyddan, -ðȳn _to pierce, thrust through_, Æ.

ðurhðyrel (i^2) _pierced through, perforated_, LL.

ðurh-ðyrelian (CP), -ðyrlian _to pierce, penetrate_.

ðurhūt prep. (w. a.) adv. _right through_, Æ.

ðurhwac-ol, -el, -ul _wide-awake, sleepless_, Æ.

ðurhwadan^6 _to penetrate, go through, bore, pierce_.

ðurhwæcendlic _very vigilant_, ÆL 23b^43.

ðurhwerod _quite sweet, very sweet_, #Gl#.

ðurhwǣt _thoroughly wet_, ÆP 172^18.

ðurhwlītan^1 † _to look through, see_.

ðurhwrecan^5 _to thrust through_.

ðurhwundian _to pierce through, wound badly_, LL 82[61,1].

ðurhwunenes f. _perseverance_, MF 176.

ðurhwunian _to abide continuously, remain, continue, settle down_, Æ,
AO, CP: _persevere, hold out, be steadfast_, CP.

ðurhwunigendlic _constant, continued_. adv. -līce.

ðurhwunol _perpetual_, NC 328.

ðurhwunung f. _perseverance, persistency_: _continued residence_.

ðurhyrnan = ðurhiernan

ðurresdæg = ðunresdæg

ðurruc m. _small ship_? _hold of a ship_? _WW_ 181^35. [v. ‘_thurrock_’]

ðurscon pret. pl. of ðerscan.

ðursdæg (_Jn_) = ðunresdæg

ðurst (y) m. ‘_thirst_,’ _Lcd_; Æ, AO, #VPs#.

ðurstig ‘_thirsty_,’ _PPs, Mt_ (y); Æ: _thirsting after, greedy_, _Bo_.

ðuru = duru

ðuruh == ðurh

ðus adv. _‘thus,’ in this way_, _Bl, Cp, Lk_: _as follows_, _Bo, MH,
MtR_: _to this extent_ (qualifying adjs.), _Æ, B, Gl_.

ðūsend num. (sbn., always followed by gen.) ‘_thousand_,’ _Bl, Chr, WW_;
AO, CP.

ðūsend-ealdor, -ealdorman m. _captain of a thousand men_, v. OEG 4747.

ðūsendfeald ‘_thousand-fold_,’ _Æ, W_.

ðūsendgerīm ‡ n. _computation by thousands_.

ðūsendgetel n. _a thousand_. #ÆGr# 284^4.

ðūsendhīwe _multiform_, WW 101^1.

ðūsendlic adj. _of a thousand_.

ðūsendmǣle? adj. _a thousand each, a thousand_.

ðūsendmǣlum † adv. _in thousands_.

ðūsendmann m. _captain of a thousand men_, Æ.

ðūsendrīca m. _chief of a thousand men_, WW 110^11.

ðūsent- = ðūsend-

ðuslic = ðyllic

ðuss = ðus

ðūtan = ðēotan

ðūðistel m. _sow-thistle_, _Gl, WW_. [‘_thow-thistle_’]

+ðūxsian (#Dom# 105) = +ðūhsian

ðwā (NG) = ðwēa pres. 1 sg. of ðwēan.

ðwægen pp. of ðwēan.

ðwǣl = ðwēal

ðwǣle? (ē) f. _fillet_? _towel_? v. OEG 53^26.

±ðwǣnan _to soften, moisten_, BH, #Lcd#.

ðwæng = ðwang

ðwær- = ðwer-

±ðwǣre (usu. +) _united, concordant, harmonious_, Æ: _compliant,
obedient_: _agreeable, pleasant, gentle_: _peaceful_: _prosperous_. adv.
-līce.

±ðwǣrian (ē) _to agree, consent to_: _reconcile_: _suit, fit_.

±ðwǣrlǣcan^1 _to agree, consent (to)_, ÆL: _suit_.

±ðwǣrnes f. _concord, peace_: _gentleness_.

ðwagen rare pp. of ðwēan.

ðwāh (A) imperat. of ðwēan.

ðwang mf. _‘thong,’ band, strap, cord_, _Æ, G, WW_: _phylactery_, _MtL_
(e), _R_ (æ).

ðwār- = ðwǣr-

ðwarm = ðwearm

ðwastrian _to whisper_, HL 18^381.

ðwāt pret. 3 sg. of ðwītan.

ðwēa pres. 1 sg. of ðwēan.

ðwēal (ǣ, ē) n. _washing, bath, laver_, CP, JnL 12^3: _soap_, ES 43·334:
_ointment_. [_Goth._ ðwahl]

±ðwēan^6 _to wash, cleanse_, Æ, CP: _anoint_, MtL 6^17.

ðwearm m? _cutting tool_, #Gl#.

ðwēhl = ðwēal

ðwēle = ðwǣle

ðwēnan = ðwǣnan

ðweng (NG) = ðwang

ðwēor, ðweorg = ðweorh

+ðweor v. buter-geð.

ðwēora m. _perversity_, CP 222^8.

ðwēores adv. (gen. of ðweorh) _athwart, transversely, obliquely_, AO:
_perversely_.

ðweorh I. adj., gmn. ðwēores _cross, transverse, bent, crooked_:
_adverse_: _angry_: _perverse, depraved_, CP. II. n. _crookedness,
wrong_.

ðweorh-fero, -furu, -fyri _cross-furrow_, #Gl#.

ðweorhtēme = ðwēortīeme

ðweorian = ðweran

±ðwēorian _to oppose, thwart, be opposed to_.

ðwēorlic _perverse, contrary, adverse_, Æ: _reversed, out of order_.
adv. -līce. CP.

ðwēornes (ȳ) f. _perversity, frowardness, obstinacy, depravity_, Æ.

ðwēorscipe m. _perversity_, CP.

ðwēortīeme (ē^2, ī^2, ȳ^2) _contentious, perverse, wicked_, CP.

ðweoton (BH 204^32) = ðwiton pret. pl. of ðwītan.

ðwēr, ðwerh = ðweorh

ðweran^4 _to stir, churn_: (†) _beat, forge, render malleable, soften_.

ðwihð (ie) pres. 3 sg. of ðwēan.

ðwīnan _to decrease, lessen_, #Lcd#.

+ðwinglod _fastened up_? (BT), HL 18^218.

ðwīr = ðweorh

ðwiril m. _handle of a churn, whisk_, WW 280^31. [ðweran]

+ðwit n. _cuttings_, BH 204^32 (v.l.). [ðwītan]

ðwītan^1 _to cut_, _‘whittle,’ cut off, cut out_, _BH, Lcd_.
[‘_thwite_’]

ðwōg, ðwōh pret. 3 sg., ðwogen pp. of ðwēan.

ðwong = ðwang

ðworen pp. of ðweran.

+ðwōrnes = +ðwēornes

ðwurh = ðweorh

ðwyhð pres. 3 sg. of ðwēan.

ðwȳr (Æ), ðwȳr- = ðweorh, ðwēor-

ðwyril = ðwiril

ðwȳrs = ðwēores

ðȳ I. pron. (instr. sing. of sē, ðæt). æfter ðȳ _after (that)_, _later_.
II. conj. and adv. _because, since, on that account_: _therefore_,
_Lcd_: _then_: (with comparatives) _the_. ðȳ...ðȳ _the...the_. mid ðȳ
_while, when_. tō ðȳ ðæt _for the purpose that, in order that_. for ðȳ
ðe _because_. ðȳ lǣs (ðe) _lest_. [‘_thy_’]

ðȳan = ðȳn

ðyc- = ðic-

ðȳdæges adv. _on the same day_.

ðȳdan = ðēodan

ðyddan _to strike, stab_, CP: _thrust, press_, Æ. [‘_thud_’]

+ðȳde _good, virtuous_. #Cra# 68.

ðyder == ðider

ðȳf == ðēof

ðȳfel m. _shrub, bush, copse, thicket_, _Lcd, LPs, WW_; Æ. [‘_thyvel_’;
ðūf]

ðȳfeðorn y? (ē, ēo, ī) m. _buckthorn_? _hawthorn_? _bramble_? _Gl_
(ē, ēo), _Lcd_ (ē), _WW_. [‘_thevethorn_’]

ðȳflen? (or ? ryplen) _bushy_, GPH 399^457.

ðyften f. _handmaid_, OEG. [‘_thuften_’]

ðȳfð = ðīefð

ðȳgan = _ðȳn_

+ðyht _pleasing_, #Rim# 18.

ðyhtig _strong_, B 1558.

ðȳhð pres. 3 sg. of ðēon.

ðȳlǣs conj. _lest_. ðȳ lǣs ðe _lest_.

ðylc = ðyllic

ðylcræft (e) m. _elocution, rhetoric_, OEG.

±ðyld (usu +) nf. _patience_, _LkLR_. [‘_thild_’]

±ðyldelic _patient_. adv. -līce _patiently, quietly_.

+ðyld-ian, -(i)gian _to be patient, bear, endure_, CP: _give in, agree_,
OEG 3237.

±ðyldig (usu. +) adj. _patient_, _DR_; Æ, CP. [v. ‘_thild_’]

+ðyldmōd _patient_, W 72^7.

+ðyldmōdnes f. _patience_, NC 297.

+ðyldum _patiently, steadfastly_.

ðyle m. _speaker, orator_: _jester_, WW 385^3.

ðylian (Æ) = ðilian

ðyling = ðil(l)ing

+ðyll n. _air, breeze_, DR 121^18.

ðyllic pron. (such like), _such, such a_, AO, CP.

+ðyllic ‘_densus_,’ OEG 5^4 (?= +ðiclic; or +ðȳllic, from ðȳn).

+ðylmēd _brought down, abased_, #LPs# 19^9.

ðȳmel m. _thumb-stall, ‘thimble,’_ _Lcd_.

ðȳmele adj. _of the thickness of a thumb_, LL 110[49,3].

±ðȳn I. _to press, squeeze, thrust, stab_: _coerce, restrain, oppress_.
[= ðyddan] II. = ðīn

±ðyncan (i) (impers. w. d.) pret. 3 sg. ðūhte _to appear, seem_, _Bo,
CP, El, Cr_; AO. mē ðyncð _methinks_, _Bo_. him ðūhte _it seemed good to
him_. [_Ger._ dünken]

±ðyncðo (usu. +) f. _dignity, rank, office_, Æ (i), CP: _meeting,
assembly_: _private arrangement (to defeat justice)_, LL 112[52].

ðynden = ðenden

±ðyngo _progress, promotion_, N: _propitiation_, DR 23^10.

ðynhlǣne _wasted, shrunk_, WW 446^24.

ðynne (i) ‘_thin_,’ _BH, RB_: _lean_, _Lcd, WW_: _not dense_, _Æ, BC_:
_fluid, tenuous_, _BH, Lcd, Met_: _weak, poor_, _BH, Lcd_.

ðynnes (i) f. _lack of density, tenuity, fluidity_, _Lcd_ 73b: _poverty,
feebleness (of sight)_, _Lcd_ 1·134. [‘_thinness_’]

±ðynnian (i) _to ‘thin,’ make thin, lessen, dilute_, _Æ, Lcd_: _become
thin_, ÆL.

ðynnol (u^2) _lean, thin_, WW 172^16.

ðynnung, ðynung f. _‘thinning,’ act of making thin_, _Lcd_ 98a.

ðynwefen _thin woven_, WW 439^34.

ðyrel (ȳ?) I. n. _hole, opening, aperture, perforation_, _BH, MtL, Sc,
WW_. II. adj. _pierced, perforated, full of holes_, CP. [‘_thirl_’;
durh]

ðyrelhūs n. _turner’s workshop_, WW 185^31 (ðryl-).

ðyrelian = ðyrlian

ðyrelung f. _piercing_, CP 153^25.

ðyrelwamb _with pierced belly_, #Rd# 79^11.

ðyrf == ðearf

ðyrfe subj. pres. sing. of ðurfan.

ðyrl = ðyrel

ðyrlian _to perforate, pierce, excavate_, _Æ_ (i), _WW_. [‘_thirl_’]

-ðyrlic v. samod-ð.

ðyrn == ðorn

ðyrne f. _thorn-bush, bramble_, Æ; Mdf.

ðyrnen _thorny, of thorns_, _Æ, CP_. [‘_thornen_’]

ðyrnet n. _thorn, bramble, thorn-thicket_, OEG.

ðyrniht, ðyrnihte _thorny_, #Lcd#.

ðyrran _to dry, render dry_, #Rd# 29^4.

ðyrre _withered_: _dry_. [_Ger._ dürr]

ðyrs m. _giant, demon, wizard_, _B, Cp_; Mdf. [‘_thurse_’]

ðyrscel == ðerscel

ðyrscð pres. 3 sg. of ðerscan.

ðyrscwold = ðerscold

ðyrst = ðurst

+ðyrst _thirsty_, MH 170^6.

ðyrstan (pers. and impers.) _to ‘thirst,’ thirst after_, _G, Lcd, Sc_;
AO, CP. [ðurst]

+ðȳrstgian = +ðrīstian

ðȳs instr. smn. of ðēs.

ðys- = ðis-

ðyslic = ðyllic

-ðyssa v. brim-ð.

ðȳster == ðēostor

ðȳstr- = ðēostr-

ðȳt, ðȳtt pres. 3 sg. of ðēotan.

-ðȳtan v. ā-ð. [_OHG._ dōzōn]

ðȳðel (#LPs# 79^11) = ðȳfel

ðyðer = ðider

ðȳw- = ðēow-

±ðȳwan _to press, impress_, Æ: _stab, pierce_: _crush, push, oppress,
check_: _threaten_.

+ðȳwe = +ðēawe  [[headword spelled “ðeawe”]]

ðȳwð = ðīefð

ðȳwung f. _threat, threatening_, GD 238^15.




=U=


uce = wuce

ucu = wucu

ūder n. ‘_udder_,’ WW 61^16.

udu (N) = wudu

ūf I. m. _owl_, #Gl#: _vulture_, #ÆGr# 48^17n. II. m. _uvula_, WW.

ufa = ufan

ufan (o) adv. _from above_, Æ, AO, CP: _over, above, on high_, CP.
on u.; u. on ðæt _besides_. on u. hærfest _in late autumn_. on u. midne
winter _after Christmas_. [_Ger._ oben]

ufancumende _coming from above_.

ufancund _from above, supreme, divine_, CP.

ufane = ufan

ufanweard adj. (often used w. d. as a prep.) _highest, topmost_, Æ.
ufanweardum _above, at the top_.

ufemest (superl. of uferra, ufor) _highest, uppermost, topmost_, _Æ_.
[‘_ovemest_’]

ufen == ufan

ufenan, ufenon I. adv. _from above_, _Jn, W_. II. prep. _over and
above_, _DD_. on ufenan _upon the top of_. [‘_ovenon_’]

ufera = uferra

±uferian _to delay, put off_, Æ: (+) _raise up_, #Bk# 8: _extol,
honour_, Æ. [ufor]

uferra comp. adj. _above, higher, upper_, _BH_; CP: _outer_, _Lcd, WW_:
_after_ (of time), _later, future_, _AO, Lcd_; CP. [‘_over_’]

uferung f. _delay_, GD 245^8.

ufeweard I. adj. _upward, ascending, upper, higher up_, Æ, CP: _later_.
II. sb. _upper part, outside_, Æ.

ufewerd = ufeweard

uffrian = uferian

ufon == ufan

ufor adv. _higher, further away, further up_, Æ, CP: _later, posterior,
subsequent_.

ufora = uferra

ufur = ufor

uf-weard, -werd = ufeweard

uht = wuht = wiht fn.

ūht, ūhta (Æ) m. _twilight, dusk, early morning, dawn_. on ūhtan _at
daybreak_. tō ūhtes _towards dawn_: _nocturns_.

ūhtantīd = ūhttīd

ūhtantīma m. _time of nocturns_.

ūhtcearu f. _sorrow at dawn_, #Wif# 7.

ūhtentīd = ūhttīd

ūhtfloga m. _twilight-flier, dragon_, B 2760.

ūhtgebed n. _morning prayer, matins_.

ūhthlem m. _crash at dawn_, B 2007.

ūhtlic I. _morning, matutinal, of matins_. II. = ūtlic

ūhtsang m. _morning song, matins_, Æ: _nocturns_.

ūhtsanglic _nocturnal, used at nocturns_, CM 1014.

ūhtsceaða m. _twilight foe_, B 2271.

ūhttīd f. _twilight, early morning, dawn_.

ūhtðegnung f. _matins_, WW 129^33.

ūhtwæcca f. _night watch, vigils_, RB 40^10.

ūle f. ‘_owl_,’ _Æ, Cp_.

ulf (#JnL# 10^12) = wulf

ulmtrēow n. _elm tree_, WW 138^12. [_L._ ulmus]

ūma I. m. _name of a plant_, #Lcd# 103b. II. m. _a weaver’s beam_, WW.

umb = ymb

umbe = ymbe

umbor † n. _infant_.

umborwesende † _being a child_, B.

un- I. negative or pejorative prefix. II. occasionally = on- (prefix
expressing reversal of a previous action) as in unbindan.

unābeden neg. ptc. _unbidden_, Æ.

unābēgendlic = unābȳgendlic

unāberendlic _intolerable, unbearable_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce, Æ, CP.

unāberiende _unbearable_, #Lcd# 3·260.

unābēt = ungebēt  [[under “ungebēted”]]

unābindendlic _indissoluble_, #Bo#.

unāblinn n. _irrepressible state, unceasing presence_, #Guth# 46^10.

unablinnend-e, -lic _unceasing, perpetual_. adv. -līce, Æ, AO, CP.

unāboht = ungeboht

unābrecendlic _inextricable_, WW 419^2.

unābȳgendlic (ē) _inflexible_, WW 421^30.

unācenned _unbegotten_, ÆH 1·464^34.

unācnycendlic _that cannot be untied or loosened_, DR 108^10. [cnyccan]

un-ācumendlic (Æ), -ācumenlic _unbearable, unattainable, impossible_.

unacumenlicnes f. _unbearableness_, RBL 114^9.

unācwencedlic _inextinguishable, unquenchable_.

unādrēogendlic _unendurable_.

unādrūgod _undried, not dried, not hardened_, CP 383^32.

unādrysn-ende, -en(d)lic _unquenchable_, NG.

un-ādwǣsced, -ādwǣscendlic, -ādwēscedlic _inextinguishable,
unquenchable_, Æ.

unǣaðe = unēaðe

unǣmta m. _want of leisure, work, occupation, hindrance_.

unæmtigian _to deprive of leisure_, AS 36^4.

unærh = unearg

unæsecgenlic (#EPs# 100^6) = unāsēðendlic?

unǣt f. _gluttony_, Æ.

unætspornen _not hindered_, GD 60^26.

unæðelboren _not of noble birth, low-born_, Æ.

unæðele _of low birth, plebeian, ignoble, base_, CP.

unæðelian (an-) _to degrade, debase_, #Bo, Met#.

unæðelice adv. _ignobly, basely_, BH 442^11.

unæðelnes f. _ignobility_, GD 151^24.

unǣwfæstlīce adv. _irreverently_: _unlawfully_.

unǣwisc (ē) ‘_pudicus_,’ WW 291^25.

unāfæhtendlic (N) = unāfeohtendlic

unāfandod _untried_, AS 32^7.

unāfeohtendlic (æ^3) _what cannot be contended against, inevitable_.

unāfīled _undefiled_, #LPs# 17^31.

unāfūliend = unfūliend

unāfunden _undiscovered_, Æ: _untried_.

unā-fylledlic, -fyllendlic _that cannot be filled, insatiable_, Æ. adv.
-līce.

unāga m. _one who owns nothing_, #PPs# 112^6.

unāgǣledlīce _unremittingly_, #Bl# 121^5.

unāgān adj. _not lapsed, in force_, KC.

unāgelȳfed = unālȳfed

unāgen _not one’s own or under one’s control, precarious_, CP.

unāgifen _unpaid_, TC 201^23.

unāgunnen _without a beginning_, ÆH.

unāhefendlic _unceasing, continual_, MFH 176.

un-ālīef-, -lē(a)f- = unālȳf-

unālogen _not false, true_, NC 328.

un-ālȳfed (CP), -lȳfe(n)dlic (īe) _not allowed, unlawful, illicit_. adv.
-līce _unlawfully, without permission_, #Sc#.

unālȳfednes (ē^2) f. _what is forbidden, licentiousness_, BH.

unālȳsendlic _without remission_, ÆH 1·500^18.

unāmælt _unmelted_, #Gl#.

unāmānsumod _not excommunicated, in church fellowship_, Æ.

unāmeten _unmeasured, unbounded_, Æ.

unāmetenlic _immeasurable, immense_, A 2·360.

unāmetgod _immeasurable, immense_, A 2·361.

unan- = unon-

unandcȳðignes (o^2) f. _ignorance_, #JVPs# 24^7.

unandergildes = unundergilde

unandett _unconfessed_, W 71^7.

unandgytful _unintelligent, incapable, ignorant, foolish_.

unandhēfe (-hoife) _insupportable_, MtR 23^4.

unandweard _not present, absent_, Æ.

unandwendlic = unāwende(n)dlic

  [[Though the meanings are similar, “unāwendedlic” (under unāwend) and
  “unāwendendlic” (under unāwendende) are different words.]]

unandwīs _unskilful_, WW.

unangyttol = unandgytful

unānrǣdnes f. _inconstancy_, #Bl# 31^34.

unāpīnedlīce adv. _with impunity_, DR 113^15.

unār f. _dishonour_, AO.

un-āræfned, -āræfne(n)dlic _not permissible, impracticable_, Æ:
_intolerable_.

unāreccendlic _unexplainable, wonderful_, #Sc# 26^15.

unārefnendlic (#VPs#) = unāræfnendlic  [[under “unāræfned”]]

unāreht _unexplained_, #Bo# 77^16.

+unārian _to dishonour_, AO.

unārīmed adj. _unnumbered, countless, innumerable_, AO.

unārīmedlic _innumerable, immeasurable_, AO. adv. -līce, AO.

unārlic _dishonourable, dishonest, disgraceful_: _contrary to what is
fitting, unnatural (of a will)_, WW. adv. -līce _dishonourably_:
_unmercifully_.

unarodscipe f. _remissness, cowardice_, CP 149^15.

unārwurðian (eo) _to dishonour_, Æ.

unārwurðlic _dishonourable_, NC 328.

unārwyrðnes f. _irreverence, indignity_, #Sc# 224^1.

unārȳmed = unārīmed

unāsæcgendlic = unāsecgendlic

unāsædd = unāsedd

unāscended _unhurt_.

unāscruncen _not withered, undecayed_, DR 24^16.

unāscyrigendlic _inseparable_, ÆH 1·326^27.

unāscyrod _not separated_, WW 253^3.

unāsecgende _unspeakable, ineffable_, BH 264^30.

unāsecgendlic _indescribable, unspeakable, ineffable_, Æ. adv. -līce.

unāsedd _unsatisfied, unsatiated_, #Gl#.

unāsēðenlic (#KGl#), -āsēðendlic _insatiable_.

unāsīwod (ēo) _unsewed, without seam_, Jn 19^23.

unāsmēagendlic _inconceivable, inscrutable, unsearchable_, Æ.

unāsolcenlīce _diligently_, RB 20^19.

un-āsperiendlic (#KGl#), -āsporiendlic (GD) _unsearchable_.

unāspring-ende, -endlic (GD) _unfailing_.

unāstīðod _not hardened, not firm_, CP 383^32.

unāstyr-ed, -od _unmoved_, GD.

un-āstyriende, -āstyri(g)endlic adj. _immovable, firm_: _motionless_, Æ.

unāsundrodlic _inseparable_, DR.

unāswundenlīce adv. _diligently_, BH.

unātaladlic (N) = unātellendlic

unāteald _uncounted_.

unātellendlic (ea) _innumerable_.

unātemed _barbarous_, BH.

unātemedlic _untameable, wild, fierce_, BH 162^28.

unātēoriende _indefatigable_, OEG.

unātēorigendlic _lasting, permanent, unceasing_, Æ: _indefatigable,
unwearied_. adv. -līce.

unātēorod _unwearied_, OEG.

un-ātēriend-, -toriend- = unātēorigend-

unātwēogendlīce = untwēogendlīce

unāðrēotend _unwearied, assiduous, persistent_, #Cr# 388.

unāðroten _unwearied, indefatigable, vigorous_, CP 171^9. adv.
-līce, CP.

unāwægendlic _unshaken_, TC 319^9.

unā-wæscen, -waxen _unwashed_, WW.

unāwemmed, -lic _unstained, spotless_, N.

unāwemmednes f. _incorruption_, A 8·330.

unā-wend, -wended(lic) _unchangeable, unchanged, inviolate_.

unāwendend-e, -lic _unchangeable, unceasing_. adv. -līce.

unāwerded (oe; = ie) _unhurt_, N.

unāwīdlod _undefined_, DR.

unāwriten _unwritten_, Æ.

un-bældo, -bældu = unbieldo

unbærende = unberende

unbald = unbeald

unbealaful _guiltless, innocent_, W.

unbeald (a) _cowardly, timid, weak, irresolute, distrustful_, CP.

unbealu n. _innocence_, #PPs# 100^2.

unbeboht _unsold_, AO 18^10.

unbebyriged _unburied_.

unbecēas _incontestable_, LL 112[53,1].

unbecrafod _unquestioned, not subject to claims_, LL 358[72].

unbecweden _unbequeathed_, TC.

unbeden _unbidden_, Æ.

unbe-fangenlic, -feonglic (BH 224^19 Ca) _unintelligible,
incomprehensible_, Æ.

unbefliten _undisputed_, EC 69´.

unbefohten _unopposed, unattacked_, #Ma# 57.

unbefōndlic _incomprehensible_, BH 224^19#o#.

unbegān _untilled_: _unadorned_.

unbegrīpendlic _incomprehensible_, #Bl#.

unbegunnen _without a beginning_, Æ.

unbehēafdod _not beheaded_, Æ.

unbehēfe _not suitable, inconvenient_, WW 508^34.

unbehelendlīce adv. _openly, without concealment_, W 138^3.

unbehelod _uncovered, naked_, Æ.

unbehrēowsigende _unrepenting_, Æ.

unbelimp = ungelimp

unbeorhte (y) _not brightly_, #Bo#.

unberēafigendlic _never to be taken away_, ÆL 23b^243.

unberende _unbearable_: _unfruitful, barren_.

unberendlic _unbearable_, #Lcd# 3·260^23.

unberendnes f. _barrenness_.

unbermed _unleavened, unfermented_. [beorma]

unbesacen (æ^2) _undisputed_.

unbesǣndlic = unbesēondlic

unbesænged = unbesenged

unbescēawod _improvident, inconsiderate_. adv. -līce.

unbescoren _unshorn_, RB 135^29.

unbesenced = unbesenged

unbesenged _not singed, unburnt_, W 25^19.

unbesēondlic (BH 224^19) = unbefōndlic?

unbesmiten _undefiled, pure, spotless_, Æ.

unbesmitennes f. _spotlessness_.

unbesorh _unconcerned, not interested_, ÆH 2·486^9.

unbēted _uncompensated, unexpiated, unatoned_, #Cr# 1312.

unbeðōhte adv. _unthinkingly_, CP 434^2.

unbeðyrfe † _useless, idle, vain_.

unbeweddod _unbetrothed, unmarried_, Æ.

unbewelled _not boiled away_, #Lcd# 93b. [weallan]

unbiddende _not praying_, ÆH 1·156^4.

unbieldo (æ) f. _want of boldness, diffidence, timidity_, CP.

unbilewit (y^2) ‘_immitis_,’ OEG 56^232.

unbindan^3 _to unbind, loose_, Æ: _pay_ (NG; trans. of ‘_solvere_’). [=
onbindan]

unbiscopod _not confirmed by a bishop_.

unbiðyrfe = unbeðyrfe

unblēoh _clean, bright_.

unbletsung f. _curse_, LL (310^35).

unblinnendlīce _incessantly_, BH 34^6.

unbliss f. _sorrow, affliction_, Æ.

+unblissian _to make unhappy_, NC 297.

unblīðe _joyless, sad, sorrowful_, CP: _unfriendly_.

unblīðemēde _sad of heart_, MtL 26^37.

unblōdig _bloodless_, GPH 395^16.

unblonden _unmixed_, DR 68^15.

unboht _unbought, free_, NG.

unboren _unborn_, Æ, CP.

unbrād _narrow_.

unbræce † _unbreakable, indestructible_.

unbræcen = unbrocen

un-brece, -bri(e)ce = unbryce

unbroc v. unbrocheard.

unbrocen _unbroken, whole, entire_.

unbrocheard _delicate, tender_.

unbrosn-igendlic (Æ), -endlic (GD) _indestructible, incorruptible_.

unbrosnodlīce _incorruptibly_, GD 348^23.

unbrosnung f. _incorruptibility_, Æ.

unbryce † _unbreakable_: _indestructible, everlasting_. [brecan]

unbrȳce _useless_. [brūcan]

unbrȳde _honestly_, LL 400[2].

unbȳed _uninhabited, desert_, NG.

unbyergo np. _uninhabited places_, DR 1^9.

unbyrged _unburied_, MH 28^21.

unbyrhte = unbeorhte

unbyrnende _without burning_, B 2548.

unc pers. pron. (d. a. dual) _us two_.

uncænned = unācenned

uncāfscipe m. _sloth, neglect_, #Chr# 47.

uncamprōf _unwarlike_, GPH 399.

uncapitulod _without headings (to chapters)_, LL (204^1).

uncēaped _gratuitous, gratis_, MtL 10^8.

uncēapunga _gratuitously_, #Da# 746.

un-cēas, -cēast n? _oath of reconciliation_, LL 104[35].

uncenned = unācenned

uncer I. g. dual of pers. pron. _of us two_. II. poss. pron. _belonging
to us two_.

uncet = unc

unclǣmod _unsmeared_, GPH 398.

un-clǣne, -clǣnlic _unclean, impure_, CP. adv. -līce.

unclǣnnes f. _uncleanness, impurity_, AO, CP.

unclǣno f. _uncleanness_, NG.

±unclǣnsian _to soil, pollute_, AO, CP.

unclǣnsod _unpurified_, CP.

unclēn- = unclǣn-

uncnyttan _to unbind, untie, loosen_, Æ. [cnotta]

un-coða m., -coðu f. _disease_, Æ.

uncræft m. _evil practice_, LL, W.

uncræftig _helpless_, DD 239.

uncrafod (LL 232, 14) = unbecrafod

uncre gdf. of uncer II.

uncristen _infidel_, BH 2·357.

uncumlīðe _inhospitable_, W 257^14.

uncūð _unknown, strange, unusual_, AO: _uncertain_, CP: _unfriendly,
unkind, rough_.

uncūða m. _stranger_.

uncūðlic _unknown_. adv. -līce _in an unfriendly manner, unkindly_.

uncūðnes f. _strangeness_, GD 278^15.

uncwaciende _firmly_, CP 41^7.

uncweden _(unsaid), revoked_, WW 114^45.

uncwēme _not pleasing_, MF 176.

uncweðende _speechless, inanimate_.

uncwisse _dumb_, BH 290^12.

un-cwyd, -cwydd _uncontested, undisputed_, LL.

uncȳme _unseemly, mean, paltry, poor_.

uncynde _unnatural_, #Bo# 91^21#b#.

un-cynn, -cynlic, -cynelic _unsuitable, improper_.

uncȳpe _gratuitous_, WW 514^31.

uncȳped = uncēaped

un-cyst, -cyste f. _mistake, error_: _vice, wickedness, crime_, Æ, CP:
_stinginess, parsimony_, Æ: _disease_, #Lcd#. [cēosan]

uncystig _mean, stingy, niggardly_, Æ, CP.

uncȳð = uncūð

uncȳðig _ignorant, unacquainted with_: _devoid of_, #Gu# 1199.

un-cȳðð, -cȳððu f. _ignorance_, Æ, CP: _foreign country_.

undǣd f. _wicked deed, crime_.

undæftelīce = ungedæftelīce

un-dǣled, -dæld _undivided_, #Bo#.

undēaded _not deadened_, #Lcd# 3a.

undēadlic _immortal, for all eternity_, Æ. adv. -līce.

undēadlicnes f. _immortality_, Æ.

undēagollīce = undēogollīce

undearnunga adv. _openly_.

undēað- = undēad-

undēaw _without dew_, #Lcd# 35a.

undeclīnigendlic _indeclinable_, #ÆGr#.

undēd = undǣd

undēogollīce (ī) adv. _plainly, clearly_, CP.

undēop _shallow, low_, CP.

undēopðancol _shallow, silly_, ÆH 1·286^29.

undēor = undēore I.

undēore I. adj. _cheap_, CP. II. adv. _cheaply_.

undeornunga = undearnunga

under I. prep. w. d. and a. _‘under,’ beneath, among_: _before, in the
presence of_: _under the shelter of_, #Chr#: _in subjection to, under
the rule of_: _during_: _by means of, by_. swerian u. God _to swear by
God_. u. bæc = under-bæc. II. adv. _beneath, below, underneath_.

underāgendlic adj. ‘_subnixus_,’ DR 182^16.

underandfōnd (o^3, oe^4) ‘_susceptor_,’ DR 193^6.

under-bæc, -bæcling adv. _backwards, back, behind_, Æ, CP.

underbēgan _to subject_, N. [bīegan]

underbeginnan^3 _to undertake, purpose_, Æ.

underberan^4 _to support, endure_.

under-brǣdan, -bregdan _to spread under_.

underbūgan^2 _to submit (to)_, Æ.

underburh f. _suburb_, Æ (#Deut# 32^32).

underburhware mp. _dwellers in a suburb_.

undercerran _to overturn, subvert_, LkLR 23^2. [cierran]

undercing = undercyning

undercrammian _to stuff between, fill out underneath_, ÆH 1·430^4.

undercrēopan^2 _to be secretly grasped, seized by something_, Æ:
_penetrate, undermine_, GD.

undercuman^4 _to assist_, N.

under-cyning, -cyng m. _under-king, viceroy_, Æ.

underdelf n. _undermining_, #ASPs# 79^17.

underdelfan^3 _to dig under, undermine, break through_, Æ.

underdīacon m. _subdeacon_.

underdōn anv. _to put under_, Æ.

underdrencan _to choke by drowning_, MkL 5^13.

underdrifennes f. _subjection_, LkL p6^16.

underēade (N) = underēode, pret. 3 sg. of undergān.

undereoton (#Ruin# 6) = undereten pp. of underetan.

underetan^5 _to eat underneath, undermine, subvert_.

underfang ‘_susceptor_,’ #SPs#.

underfangelnes = underfangenes

underfangen (pp. of underfōn) _neophyte_, ÆL 31^730.

underfang-enes, -elnes f. _undertaking, assumption_: _reception,
hospitality_, GD 76^22.

underfealdan ‘_subdere_,’ EHy 6^30.

underfeng I. m. _undertaking, taking in hand_, CP 23^22. II. pret. 3 sg.
of underfōn.

underflōwan^7 _to flow under_, #Rd# 11^2.

underfolgoð m. _subordinate office_, AO 286^5#c#.

underfōn _to receive, obtain, take, accept_, Æ, AO, CP: _take in,
entertain_: _take up, undertake, assume, adopt_, Æ, AO, CP: _submit to,
undergo_: _steal_, GD, #Lcd#.

underfōnd m. _one who takes anything in charge_, #LPs#.

underfōnlic _to be received_, RBL 97^8.

underfyligan ‘_subsequi_,’ LkL 23^55.

undergān anv. _to undergo_: _undermine, ruin_.

undergangan^7 = undergān

undergend- = underigend-

undergeoc _under the yoke, tame_, MkL 21^5.

undergerēfa m. _‘proconsul,’ deputy-governor_, Æ.

undergereord = underngereord

undergesett _placed under_, GD 307^12.

undergestandan^6 _to stand under_, LL 108[44].

undergeðēoded _subject_, LL 88´.

undergeðēodnes = underðēodnes

undergietan^5 (i, y) _to note, mark, understand, perceive_, AO.

underginnan^3 _to begin, undertake_, Æ.

undergitan (Æ) = undergietan

undergynnan = underginnan

undergytan (Æ) = undergietan

underhebban^6 _to bear, support, lift_, NG.

underhlystan _‘subaudire,’ to supply an omitted word_, #ÆGr# 151.

underhlystung f. _the act of supplying an omitted word_, #ÆGr# 151.

underhnīgan^1 _to submit to, undergo_, Æ, CP: _succumb to, sink under_.

underholung f. ‘_suffossum_,’ LV^2 #Ps# 79^17.

underhwītel m. _under-garment_, WW 187^21.

underhwrǣdel = underwrǣdel

underi-ende, -gende, -gendlic _inoffensive, harmless_, AO.

underiernan^3 _to run under_: ‘_succurrere_,’ DR 43^8.

underlāttēow m. _consul_, AO 68^2#c#.

underlecgan _to underlay, prop, support_, Æ, CP.

underlicgan^5 _to underlie, to be subject to, give way to_, Æ.

underlihtan _to alleviate_, DR.

underling m. _underling, inferior_.

underlūtan^2 _to bow or bend under_: _support, sustain_, CP.

undermete = undernmete

undern m. _morning (from 9.0 a.m. to 12.0 noon)_: _the third hour_ (=
_9.0 a.m._; later, _11.0 a.m._), Æ.

underne = undierne

underneoðan (æ^3, y^3) adv. _underneath_, AO.

underngereord m. _morning meal, breakfast_, AO.

underngeweorc n. _breakfast_, GD 66^12.

undern-giefl, -gifl n. _repast, breakfast_, CP 322^19.

underniman^4 _to take in, receive, comprehend, understand_, Æ: _blame,
be indignant at_: _take upon oneself_, Æ: _steal_, #Lcd#.

underniðemest _lowest of all_, #Met# 20^35.

undernmǣl n. _morning time_, Æ.

undernmete m. _morning meal, breakfast_, AO.

undernrest f. _morning rest_, MH 42^6.

undernsang m. _tierce (religious service about 9.0 a.m.)_.

undernswǣsendu np. _early meal_, BH 164^30.

underntīd f. _the third hour_ (= _9.0 a.m._), _noon, morning-time_, Æ:
_tierce_.

undernyðan (Æ) = underneoðan

underondfōnd = underandfōnd

underplantian ‘_supplantare_,’ #Sc, SPs#.

undersang = undernsang

underscēotan^2 _to prop up, sustain, support_, CP: _intercept, pass
under_.

underscyte m. _passage underneath, transit_, Æ: _brake, drag-chain_, OEG
50^15.

undersēcan _to examine, investigate, scrutinize_, CP. [_Ger._
untersuchen]

undersettan ‘_supponere_,’ #LPs# 36^24?

undersingan^3 ‘_succinere_,’ #Gr# 181^2.

undersittan^5 ‘_subsidere_,’ #ÆGr# 157^5.

undersmūgan^2 _to creep under, surprise_.

understandan^6 (o^3) _to ‘understand,’ perceive_, Æ, CP: _observe,
notice, take for granted_, ÆL 23b^186: ‘_subsistere_,’ DR.

understandennes f. ‘_substantia_,’ DR 31^20 (o^3).

understanding f. _intelligence_, #Sc# 221^13.

understapplian ‘_supplantare_,’ #LPs# 16^13.

understaðolfæst = unstaðolfæst

understingan^3 _to prop up, support_, CP 113^11.

understond- = understand-

understrēdan _to strew under_, MH 18^21.

undersyrc m. _undershirt_, WW 379^30. [serce]  [[under “serc”]]

undertīd = underntīd

undertōdāl n. _secondary division_, #ÆGr# 291^5.

undertunge f. _‘sublingua,’ part under or behind the tongue,
tongue-ligament_, WW 264^17 (or ? two words, Cp, #LPs# 9^28; 65^17).

undertungeðrum _tongue-ligament_, _Lcd_. [v. ‘_thrum_’]

underðencan _to consider_, CP 49^23: (refl.) _change one’s mind,
repent_, LL 438[22] (æ^3).

underðēnian _to serve under_, #Sc# 5^6.

underðēod _subjected, subject_: _assistant, suffragan_.

underðēodan (īe, ȳ) _to subjoin, add_: _subjugate, subject, subdue,
reduce, degrade_, Æ, CP: _support_, OEG 4339.

under-ðēodendlic, -ðēodenlic _subjunctive_, #ÆGr#.

underðēodnes f. _subjection, submission, obedience_, Æ.

underðēow m. _subject, slave_, AO.

underðīedan (AO, CP) = underðēodan

underðīednes (ī^3) = underðēodnes

underðȳdan = underðēodan

underweaxan^6 ‘_succrescere_,’ #Sc# 104^8.

underwedd n. _deposit, pledge_, Æ.

underwendan ‘_subvertere_,’ #Sc# 196^6.

underweorpan ‘_subjicere_,’ #EPs# 143^2.

underwrǣdel m? _waistband_, WW 153^1.

underwreðian (eo, i, y) _to support, sustain, uphold, strengthen,
establish_, Æ, CP.

underwreðung f. _propping up, support, sustentation_.

underwrītan _to write at the foot of, subscribe_, BH 312^30.

under-wriðian, -wryðian = underwreðian

underwyrtwalian ‘_supplantare_,’ #EPs# 17^40.

underȳcan _to add_, A 13·385^292. [īecan]

underyrnan = underiernan

undierne (i, y) I. _open, manifest, clearly known_: _public,
nuncupatory_. II. adv.

undīgollīce = undēogollīce

undīlegod _unerased_, CP 423^23.

undolfen _untilled_, GD 202^4.

undōm m. _unjust judgment, injustice_.

undōmlīce _indiscreetly_, #Sc# 202^15.

undōn anv. _to undo, open, loose, separate_, Æ: _cancel, discharge,
abrogate_.

undrēfed _untroubled, undisturbed, undefiled_, CP 31^3.

undrifen _not driven or tossed_, LL 222[2].

undruncen _sober_, CP 295^8.

undrysnende _inextinguishable_, MtL 3^12.

undȳre = undēore

undyrne = undierne

unēacen (ē) _barren_, OEG 27^31.

unēacniendlic _unfruitful, sterile_, OEG 1030.

unearfoðlīce adv. _without difficulty_, OEG.

un-earg, -earh (Æ), -earhlic (Æ) _not cowardly, dauntless, bold, brave_.

unēaðe I. adj. _not easy, difficult, hard, disagreeable, grievous_. II.
adv. Æ.

unēaðelic _difficult, hard, impossible_: _troublesome_, MP 1·611. adv.
-līce.

unēaðelicnes (ȳ^2) f. _difficulty_.

unēað-lǣce, -lǣcne, -lācne _not easily cured_, #Lcd#.

unēaðmylte _indigestible_, #Lcd# 82b.

unēaðnes (ē, īe) f. _difficulty, inconvenience, trouble, worry_, Æ:
_severity, harshness_.

unēawfæstlīce = unǣwfæstlīce

un-efen, -efn, -efenlic _unequal, unlike_: _anomalous, irregular_,
#ÆGr#. adv. -efne.

un-ēmetta, -ēmota = unǣmta

unemn = unefen

unendebyrdlīce _in a disorderly manner_, CP.

unered _unploughed, uncultivated_, WW 147^3.

unēstful _ungracious_, WW 191^17.

unēð- = unēað-, unīeð-

unēwisc = unǣwisc

unfǣcne (ā) _without malice, sincere, honest, faithful_.

unfæderlīce adv. _in an unfatherly manner_, W 106^6.

unfǣge † _not fated to die_.

unfæger _not beautiful, unlovable, unlovely, deformed, ugly, hideous_.

unfægernes (e) _ugliness_, GD 279^15: _abomination_, MtL 24^15.

unfǣglic _not fatal_, #Bo# 107^29.

unfægre (ǣ) adv. _unfairly, foully_.

unfǣhð f. _peace_, (_dropping of a feud_), LL 100[28].

unfǣle _wicked, unlovely, unholy, evil_.

unfæst _not fixed, not firm, loose, unsteady, tottering_, CP.

unfæstende _not fasting_, LL (252^1).

unfæstlīce adv. _not firmly, vaguely, indistinctly_, CP 156^13.

+unfæstnian _to be without aim, ineffective_, MFH 165.

unfæstrǣd _unstable, inconstant_, CP.

unfæstrǣdnes f. _inconstancy_, CP.

unfæsð- = unfæst

unfāh _exempt from hostility, not under a ban_, LL 186[1,1].

unfealdan^7 _to unfold, open_.

unfeax _without hair, bald_.

unfēcne = unfǣcne

unfēferig _not feverish_, #Lcd# 1·164^18.

unfeger- = unfæger-

unfēlende _unfeeling, callous_, #Lcd# 99a.

unfenge _not acceptable_, MF 176.

un-feor, -feorr adv. _not far from, near_.

unfeormigende (on-) _inexpiable_, ÆL 23b^426.

unfēre _disabled, invalided_.

unfērnes f. _impotence, infirmity_, MLN 4·5.

unflitme adv.? _unreservedly_? B 1097.

un-flycge, -fligge _unfledged_, OEG 28^13.

unforbærned _unburnt_, Æ, AO.

unforboden _unforbidden, lawful_, Æ.

unforbūgendlic _unavoidable_. adv. -līce _without turning away_, ÆL
23b^431.

unforburnen _unburnt_, ÆH 2·480^7.

unforcūð _reputable, good, honourable, noble, brave_, CP. adv. -līce.
[fracoð]

unfordytt _unobstructed_, OEG 3613.

unforebyrdig _impatient_, #Sc# 8^13.

unfored (od) _unbroken_, Æ.

unforedlic (o^3) _indissoluble_, OEG.

unforesceaw-od, -odlic _inconsiderate, hasty_.

unforfeored _unbroken_? WW 231^33.

unforgifen _unforgiven_, CP: _not given in marriage_.

unforgitende _unforgetting, mindful_, #Guth# 76^22.

unforgolden _unpaid_, Æ.

unforhæfednes (fd) f. _incontinence_.

unforhladen _unexhausted_, WW 255^39.

unforht adj. _fearless, bold_. adv. -e, -līce.

unforhtigende _fearless_, ÆH 2·140^29.

unforhtmōd _fearless_, Æ.

unforlǣten (ē) _not left_, NG.

unformolsnod neg. ptc. _uncorrupted, undecayed_, Æ.

unformolten _unconsumed_, ÆH 1·488^7.

unforod = unfored

unforrot-edlic (#HGl#), -iendig (ÆP 14^7), -iendlic (OEG)
_incorruptible_.

unforscēawodlīce _unawares_: _inconsiderately, hastily_.

unfor-spornen, -spurned _not hindered_, GD 60^28.

unforswǣled _unburnt_, ÆH 2·20^15.

unforswīgod _not passed over in silence_, ÆL 23b^35.

un-forswiðen, -forswȳðed _unconquered_.

unfortredde sb. _the plant which cannot be killed by treading, polygonum
aviculare, knot-grass_.

unfortreden _not destroyed by treading_, #Lcd# 3·299´.

unforwandigendlīce adv. _unhesitatingly, boldly_.

unforwandodlic adj. _unhesitating, fearless_, CP. adv. -līce
_unhesitatingly, fearlessly, recklessly_, CP: _unswervingly_.

unforwealwod _unwithered_, #Bl# 73^25.

unforwordenlic _undecayed_, OEG.

unforworht I. _innocent_. II. _unrestricted, free_, KC.

unforwyrded _undecayed_, NC 351.

un-fracodlīce, -fracoðlīce _honourable, becomingly, fitly_, #Bo#.

unfratewod _unadorned, unpolished_, GPH 396. [frætwian]
  [[under “frætwan”]]

unfremful _unprofitable_, Æ.

unfremu f. _damage, hurt_.

unfrēondlīce _unkindly_, #Gen# 2689.

unfricgende _unquestioning_, #Gen# 2649.

unfrið m. _breach of peace, enmity, hostilities, war_, AO: _state of
being outside the king’s peace_.

unfriðflota m. _hostile fleet_, #Chr# 1000#e#.

unfriðhere m. _hostile army_, #Chr#.

unfriðland n. _hostile land_, LL 222[3,1].

unfriðmann m. _man of a hostile country_, LL 222[3,3].

unfriðscip n. _hostile ship_.

unfrōd _not aged, young, inexperienced_, B 2821.

unfrōforlīce _uncontestably_, OEG 56^187?

unfrom † _inert_.

unfūl ‘_insulsum_’ (?) MkLR 9^50.

unfulfremed _imperfect_, Æ.

unfulfremednes f. _imperfection_, CP.

unfulfremming f. _imperfection_, #LPs# 138^16.

un-fūliend (#HGl#), -fūliendlic (OEG) _incorruptible_.

unfullod _unbaptized_, LL.

unfulworht _imperfect, unfinished_, RB 20^3.

unfyrn adv. _not long ago_: _soon_.

ungænge _useless, vain_, MtR 15^6.

ungan = ongan pret. 3 sg. of onginnan.

ungeændod = ungeendod

ungeǣsce _unheard of_.

un-geǣwed (-iǣwed) _unmarried_, OEG 5248.

ungeandett _without confession_, W 135^32.

ungēara adv. _not long ago, lately, recently_: _soon, shortly_.

ungearo = ungearu

ungearu, gsm. ungear(o)wes _unready, unprepared, untilled_, AO, CP. on
ungearwe _unawares_, AO.

ungearwyrd _not respected_, WW 421^32.

ungēaðe = unēaðe

ungeāxod _unasked_, ÆH 1·428^6.

ungebarde = ungebierde

ungebēaten _unbeaten, unwrought_, Ln 23^5.

ungebēgendlic = ungebīgendlic

ungebeorhlīce _rashly_? _intemperately_? ÆH 2·322^26.

unge-bēt(ed), -bett _unatoned for_, CP: _unacquitted_, EC 217.

ungebierde (a, y) _beardless_.

ungebīged _unbent_, OEG 2977.

ungebīgendlic _inflexible_: _indeclinable_, #ÆGr#.

ungebleoh _of different colours, unlike_, #ÆGr#.

ungeblētsod _unblessed_, #Jul# 492.

ungeblȳged _intrepid_, #Gu# 913. [blēoh]

ungeboden _without being summoned_.

ungeboht _unbought, unbribed_, LL 398[8].

ungeboren _yet unborn_, LL 126 Pro.

ungebrocen _unbroken_, WW 398^32.

ungebrocod _unafflicted, uninjured_, Æ.

ungebrosnendlic _undecaying_, BH, GD.

ungebrosnod _not spoiled, uncorrupted, undecayed_, Æ.

ungebrosnung f. _incorruption_, #Sc# 71^2.

ungebunden _unbound_, #ÆGr# 14^13; GD 214^16.

ungebyrde I. _uncongenial_, #Bo# 92^22. II. = ungebierde

ungebyredlic _incongruous_, DR 179^17.

ungecindelic = ungecyndelic

ungeclǣnsod _unclean, impure_, Æ.

ungecnāwen _unknown_, #ApT# 17^13.

ungecnyrdnes f. _negligence, indifference, idleness_, ÆH 2·552^35.

ungecoplic _unsuitable, unbefitting, troublesome_. adv. -līce, #Sc#
80^14.

ungecoren _reprobate_. u. āð _oath taken by a body of persons generally_
(_opposed to_ cyreāð), LL.

ungecost _reprobate_, BH 480^4.

ungecwēme _unpleasing, disagreeable_, #Sc# 38^15.

ungecyd _unsaid, not declared_, LL 212[9].

ungecynde _unnatural, alien_.

unge-cyndelic, -cyndlic, -cynelic _unnatural, monstrous, terrible_. adv.
-līce.

ungecyrred _unconverted_, #Lcd# 3·442^1.

ungedæftelīce = ungedæftlīce

ungedæftenlic = ungedafenlic

ungedæftlīce adv. _unseasonably, inopportunely_, CP 97^16.

ungedæftnes f. _untimely intervention or interruption_, CP 97^19.

ungedafenlic _improper, unseemly_, Æ: _unseasonable_? _troublesome_? CP
(v. A 33·272). adv. -līce _improperly, unduly, unreasonably, unjustly,
unsuitably_.

ungedafenlicnes f. _unfitness, inconvenience_, #CPs# 9^22.

ungedafniendlic (#HGl# 492) = ungedafenlic

ungedallic _infinite, without end_, GD 337^11.

ungedēfe _improper, not fitting, disagreeable_. adv. -līce.

unge-dēfelic, -dēflic = ungedafenlic

unge-dered, -derod (Æ) _unhurt, uninjured, unmolested_.

ungederstig = ungedyrstig

ungedrehtlīce adv. _indefatigably_, WW 428^3.

ungedrȳme _inharmonious, discordant_. [drēam]

ungedwimorlīce _clearly, without any delusion_, NC 328.

ungedyrstig _timid_, CP 209^10.

ungeeahtendlic (æ, e) _inestimable_: _indescribable_.

ungeended = ungeendod

ungeendigendlic _infinitive_, #ÆGr#: _infinite_.

unge-endod (CP), -endodlic _unending, endless, infinite, boundless_.

ungefæd (a) _want of reason_, NC 328.

ungefǣglic = unfǣglic

ungefǣr- = ungefēr-

ungefandod _untried, having no experience in_, CP.

ungefaren _impassable, without a road_, #BlPs#.

ungefēa m. _unhappiness_, NC 328.

ungefēalīce _miserably_, #Chr# 755.

ungefēge _unfit, improper_, WW 191^22.

unge-fēle, -fēled _without feeling_, #Lcd#.

ungefēre I. _impassable_: _impenetrable, inaccessible_, CP. II. adv.
_impassably_.

ungefēred _inaccessible_.

ungefērenlic _unfrequented_? #Nar# 17^7.

ungefērlic _unsocial, internecine_. adv. -līce _in civil war_.

ungefērne _impassable_, #VPs# (oe).

ungefeðered _not feathered_, WW 427^16.

unge-fōg, -fōh I. _immoderate, excessive_, Æ: _overbearing,
presumptuous, unbending_, Æ. II. n. _excess_, NC 329. adv. -fōge
_excessively_, AO.

unge-fōglic (AO), -fōhlic _fierce, strong_: _immense_. adv. -līce.

ungefrǣg-e, -elic _unheard of, unusual, inconceivable_. adv. -līce.

ungefrætwod _unadorned_, WW 419^11.

ungefrēdelīce adv. _insensibly, callously_, CP 265^16.

ungefrēglīce = ungefrǣglīce  [[under “ungefrǣge”]]

ungefremed _unfinished_, Æ.

ungefremmung (on-) f. _imperfection_, #RPs# 138^16.

ungefullod I. _unfulfilled_, #Rd# 60^14. [fullian] II. = ungefulwod

ungefulwod _unbaptized_.

unge-fyld, -fylle(n)d(lic) _insatiable_.

ungefynde _worthless, barren, sterile_? CP 411^19.

ungefyrn adv. _not long hence, not long ago, not long after_, Æ.

ungegearwe = ungearwe, v. ungearu.

unge-gearwod (DR), -gerad (MtR) _not clothed_.

ungeglenged _unadorned_, OEG 1210.

ungegrēt _ungreeted_, #Guth# 22^20.

ungehādod _not ordained, not belonging to an order (used of men and
women)_.

un-gehǣlendlic, -gehǣledlic adj. _incurable_, VHy.

ungehǣmed _unmarried_, OEG 1174.

ungehæplic _unsuitable, unfit_, A 8·452.

ungehālgod _unhallowed, unconsecrated_, Æ.

ungehāten _unpromised, unbidden_, #Bl# 189^27.

ungehēafdod _not having come to a head_, #Lcd# 1·92^23.

ungehealdsum _unchaste_, Æ. adv. -līce.

ungehealdsumnes f. _incontinence, unchastity_, Æ.

ungehealtsum == ungehealdsum

ungehefegod ‘_non...gravis_,’ OEG 27^31.

ungehende (æ^3) _remote_, HL 12^8.

ungehendnes f. _remoteness, distance_, #ÆGr# 14^19.

ungeheort (y) _disheartened_, Æ.

ungehēred = ungehȳred

unge-hīersum (CP), -hīrsum (Æ) _disobedient, rebellious_.

ungehīrsumnes (ȳ) f. _disobedience_, Æ.

ungehīrsumod (ȳ) _disobedient_, RBL 12^8.

unge-hīwod, -hīwodlic _unformed, not fashioned, unshapen_: _unfeigned,
genuine_.

ungehlēoðor _inharmonious_, WW 224^7.

ungehrepod _untouched_, Æ.

ungehrinen _untouched_, BH, GD.

ungehwǣde _much_, #Lcd# 53b.

ungehwǣrnes = ungeðwǣrnes

ungehȳred (ē^3) _unheard of, untold_, BH 40^33.

ungehȳrnes f. _hardness of hearing, deafness_, #Lcd#.

ungehȳr- = unge-hīer-, -hīr-

ungehyrt = ungeheort

ungel m. _fat, tallow, suet_, Æ.

ungelācnod _unhealed_, #Guth# 66^16.

ungelādod _not acquitted_, EC 217.

ungelæccendlic _unreprovable_, #Sc# 119^11.

ungelǣred _untaught, illiterate, unlearned, ignorant, rude_, Æ, CP. adv.
-līce.

ungelǣredlic _unteachable_, GD 110^21.

ungelǣrednes f. _unskilfulness, ignorance_, CP.

ungelaðod _uninvited_, ÆH 1·128^18.

ungelēaf _unbelieving_, #PPs# 67^19.

ungelēafa m. _unbelief_.

ungelēafful _unbelieving_, Æ, CP.

ungelēaffullic _unbelieving_: _incredible_. adv. -līce.

ungelēaffulnes f. _unbelief_.

ungelēaflic _incredible_, Æ.

ungelēafsum _unbelieving_.

ungelēafsumnes f. _unbelief, infidelity, heathenism_, BH 70^25.

ungelēf- = ungelīf-

ungelēofa = ungelēafa

ungelīc _unlike, different, dissimilar, diverse_, CP. adv. -līce.

ungelīca m. _one unlike others_, ÆL 7^28.

ungelīclic _improper_. adv. -līce.

ungelīcnes f. _unlikeness, difference_, CP.

ungelīef- = ungelīf-

ungelīfed (ȳ) I. _unbelieving_, Æ. II. _illicit_, BH 2·229.

ungelīf-edlic, -endlic (īe, ȳ) _incredible, extraordinary_. adv. -līce.

ungelīfend (ē) m. _unbeliever_, NG.

ungelīfnes (ē) f. _unbelief_, NG.

ungeligen = ungelygen

ungelimp nm. _mishap, misfortune_, Æ.

ungelimplic _inconvenient, unfortunate, disastrous_, Æ: _abnormal,
unreasonable_. adv. -līce.

ungelȳf- = ungelīf-

ungelygen _not lying, true_, LL.

ungēm- = ungȳm-

ungemaca m. _‘impar,’ not a match_, #ÆGr#.

ungemæc _unlike_, GD 91^15; WW 223^35.

ungemæt == ungemet

ungemǣte I. _immense_. II. adv. _immensely_.

ungemǣtlic _excessive_, AO 28^27.

ungemēde _unbearable, unpleasant_. #Mod# 25.

ungemēdnes f. _adversity_, DR 63^13.

ungemeltnes f. _indigestion_, #Lcd# 68b.

ungemenged _unmixed, pure_, #Bo# 100^31.

ungemengednes f. _purity_.

ungemet n. _excess, superfluity_: _immensity_: _want of moderation_.

ungemēt _not met with, unknown_, OEG 2488.

ungemete I. adj. _huge_, GD 12^9. II. adv. _excessively, immeasurably,
immoderately, extremely, very_.

ungemetegod (Æ) = ungemetgod

ungemetelice = ungemetlice  [[form of “ungemetlic”?]]

ungemetes = ungemete II.

ungemetfæst _not moderate, intemperate, excessive_: (†) _very firm_.

ungemetfæstnes f. _excess, intemperance_, #Bo# 109^9.

ungemetgod _out of due proportion, excessive_, CP: _unbridled,
intemperate_.

ungemetgung f. _excess, want of moderation_, Æ, CP.

ungemetlic _immeasurable, immense_, AO: _excessive, immoderate,
violent_. adv. -līce, AO, CP.

ungemetnes f. _extravagance_, OET 180^3.

ungemetum adv. = ungemete

ungemīdlod _unrestrained, unbridled_, Æ.

ungemiht _without strength, weak_.

ungemihtig = unmihtig

ungemindig = ungemyndig

ungemōd _discordant, dissentient, quarrelsome_, CP.

ungemōdignes f. _contentiousness_, W 8^15n.

ungemōdnes f. _strife_, CP 344^9.

ungemolsnod _undecayed_, MH 78^1.

ungemunecod _not made a monk_, LL (142^4).

ungemylt _undigested_, #Lcd# 2·284.

ungemynd f. _madness_, #Lcd#.

ungemyndig (w. g.) _unmindful, forgetful, heedless (of)_, Æ.

ungenæmnedlic _unexpected_, GD 341^13.

ungenīdd (ē, īe) _uncompelled_, AO, CP.

ungeocian _to unyoke_, #ÆGr# 277^3.

ungeorne _negligently_: _unwillingly_, AO.

ungeornful _indifferent, remiss, slothful_, CP.

ungerād I. (w. g.) _ignorant, foolish, unskilled, unfit_, Æ, CP: (w. d.)
_at variance, wrong, discordant, dissentient_, Æ, AO: _ill-conditioned,
rude_, Æ. II. n. _discord_, CP: _folly_, Æ.

ungerādnes (ǣ) _disagreement_, #Lcd#.

ungerǣd == ungerād

ungerǣde _foolish_, MF 176. adv. -līce _sharply, roughly, violently_.

ungerǣdnes f. _disagreement, sedition_, AO.

ungerec n. _tumult_, BH.

ungereccan _to clear oneself of an accusation_, LL 168[1,2].

ungereclic _unruly, unrestrained_, #Bl# 19^6 adv. -līce _confusedly,
recklessly_.

ungerēdelīce = ungerǣdlīce  [[form of “ungerǣde”]]

ungerēnod _not ornamented_, TC 515^26. [regnian]

ungereord _uninstructed, barbarous_, WW 193^3.

ungereordedlic _insatiable_, #Ps#.

ungereordod _unfed, empty_, Æ.

ungerepod = ungehrepod

ungerian = ungierwan

ungeriht = unriht

ungerihte _uncorrected, unreformed_, NC 329.

ungerīm I. n. _countless number, host_, Æ. II. countless, untold, Æ.

unge-rīmlic, -rīmed(lic) _countless, untold_.

ungerinen = ungehrinen

ungerinselīce = ungerisenlīce

ungerīped _immature, too early_, Æ.

ungerisedlīce = ungerisenlīce

ungerīsende _indecent_, OEG 3673.

ungerisene I. _unseemly, improper_: _incongruous, inconvenient_. II. =
ungerisnu

ungerisenlic _unbecoming, improper_, CP. adv. -līce, CP.

ungerisnes (uni-) f. _impropriety_, #HGl# 507.

ungerisnu n. (often pl.) _inconvenience_: _impropriety, indignity,
disgrace_, AO.

ungerwan = ungierwan

ungerȳde I. _rough, boisterous, harsh_. II. n. _rough place_, Lk 3^5.

ungerȳdelic _rough, violent_, GD 265^2; LV 47. adv. -līce _suddenly,
impetuously_, Æ.

ungerȳdnes f. _noise, tumult_, #Sc# 82^2.

ungesadelod = unsadelod

ungesǣlig _unhappy, unfortunate_, Æ, AO, CP. adv. -līce _unhappily_:
_wickedly_.

ungesǣlignes f. _unhappiness, misfortune_, BH, #Bl#.

ungesǣllīce = ungesǣliglīce  [[form of “ungesǣlig”]]

ungesǣlð f. _trouble, misfortune, unhappiness, sorrow_, CP.

ungesawen = ungesewen

ungesawenlic = ungesewenlic  [[under “ungesewen”]]

ungescaðignes = ungesceððignes

ungescēad I. n. _want of intelligence, senselessness_. II. adj.
_unreasonable_. III. adv. _exceedingly_, #Da# 243. [cp. _Ger._ gescheit]

ungescēadlic _unreasonable, indiscreet_. adv. -līce _unreasonably,
absurdly_.

ungescēad-wīs, -wīslic _unintelligent, irrational, imprudent, foolish_,
Æ, CP. adv. -līce.

ungescēadwīsnes f. _want of intelligence, indiscretion, folly,
ignorance_, CP.

un-gesceapen, -gescepen neg. ptc. _uncreated, unformed_, Æ.

ungescended _unhurt_, DR 146^11.

ungesceððed _unhurt_, BH 218^25.

ungesceððignes (a) f. _innocence_, MFH (Vesp. D xiv).

ungescrǣpe _inconvenient, useless_.

ungescrǣpnes (ē) f. _discomfort_, BH 322^30.

ungescrǣpo n. _inconvenience_, BH 382^3.

ungesegenlic = ungesewenlic  [[under “ungesewen”]]

ungeseht adj. _at variance_, FM 358^28.

ungesēl- = ungesǣl-

ungesēne = ungesȳne

ungesēnod _not signed with the cross_. [segn]

ungesēonde _blind_, #Lcd# 1·368^24.

ungeseowenlic = ungesewenlic  [[under “ungesewen”]]

unge-sewen, -sewen(d)lic _unseen, invisible_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce.

ungesibb (†) _not related_: _unfriendly, hostile_, #Bl#, BH.

ungesibsum _not peaceable, quarrelsome, contentious_, CP.

ungesibsumnes f. _quarrelsomeness, discord_, CP 351^1.

ungesilt = unsealt

ungesoden _unsodden, unboiled_, #Lcd#.

ungesom _at variance_, ÆH 1·478^25.

ungespēdig = unspēdig

ungestæððe- = ungestæððig-

ungestæððig _unsteady, inconstant, unstable, fickle_, CP. adv. -līce.

ungestæððignes f. _inconstancy, frivolity_, CP.

ungestrēon n. _ill-gotten treasure_, W 183^9.

ungestroden _not subject to confiscation_, LL 12[4,1].

ungesundlīce _excessively, exceedingly_, GD 15^2.

ungeswēge _inharmonious, dissonant, discordant, out of tune, harsh_,
#Gl#.

ungeswenced _unceasing_, NC 329.

ungeswencedlic _unwearying_, BH 436^16.

ungeswicendlīce _incessantly_.

ungeswuncen _not laboured over, not well done_, WW 430^11.

ungesylt = unsealt

ungesȳne (ē) _unseen, invisible_, WW 17^46.

ungesȳnelic _invisible_, #Bl#.

ungetǣse I. n. _trouble, hardship, severity_, CP. II. adj. _troublesome,
inconvenient_.

ungetǣslīce adv. _inconveniently_, AS 29^20.

ungetǣsnes f. _unsuitableness, inconvenience_, WW 419^38.

ungetel _innumerable_.

ungetemed = unātemed

ungetemprung f. _inclemency_, CM 461.

ungetēoriendlic _inexhaustible_. adv. -līce _incessantly_, LL.

ungetēorod _unfailing_, Æ.

ungetēse = ungetǣse II.

unge-tīmu f? -tīme n? _evil time, adversity, mishap_, AO, GD.

ungetinge (Æ), ungetingful (GPH) _not eloquent_. [tunge]

ungetogen _uneducated_, Æ.

ungetrēowe (ī, īe, ū, ȳ) _untrue, faithless_, Æ.

ungetrēownes f. _unbelief_, CP 447^6.

ungetrēowsian = untrēowsian

ungetrēowð f. _unfaithfulness, treachery_, W 160^6.

ungetrum _weak, infirm_, #Bo# 132^32.

unge-trūw-, -trȳw- = un(ge)trēow-

ungetwǣre (WW 248^17) = ungeðwǣre

ungetwēogendlīce (GD 231^21) = untwēogendlīce

unge-tȳd, -tȳdd _ignorant, untaught, unskilful_, CP.

ungetyred = ungetēorod

ungeðæslic _unfit, improper, unseemly_, WW 191^23.

ungeðanc mn. _evil thought_, W.

ungeðancful _unthankful, ungrateful_, W 241^4.

ungeðeaht n. _evil counsel_, RB 118^10.

ungeðeahtendlīce _hastily_, BH 124^13.

ungeðēawe adv. _not customary_, #Guth# 72^17.

ungeðēawfæst _ill-regulated_, RBL 14^16.

ungeðēod _disunited, separate_, #Gen# 1698.

ungeðinged _unexpected_, CP 317^13.

ungeðungen _base_, #Nar# 42^12.

ungeðwǣre I. _disagreeing, quarrelsome, troublesome, stubborn,
vexatious, undutiful, irreverent_, Æ, CP. II. n. _disturbance_, MtR
26^5.

ungeðwǣrian _to be discordant, disagree, be at variance with_, Æ.

ungeðwǣrlic _inharmonious, discordant_, RB 19^2: _hostile_, GD 349. adv.
-līce _peevishly_.

ungeðwǣrnes f. _disturbance, quarrel, discord_, AO.

ungeðwēre = ungeðwǣre

ungeðyld fn. _impatience_, CP. [ðolian; _Ger._ ungeduld]

ungeðyldelīce adv. _impatiently_, #Bo#.

ungeðyldig _impatient_, Æ, CP. [_Ger._ ungeduldig]

ungeðylð = ungeðyld

ungeðyre ‘_discensor_’? Cp 283#d#.

ungewæder = ungewider  [[form of “ungewidere”?]]

ungewæm- = ungewem-

ungewǣpnod _without weapons, unarmed_, Æ.

ungewealden _disordered (of the stomach)_, #Lcd#.

un-gewealdes, -gewaldes adv. _involuntarily, by chance_, CP.

ungeweaxen _not full grown, immature_, WW 352^27.

ungeweder = ungewider  [[form of “ungewidere”?]]

un-gewemmed (Æ), -gewemmedlic _unspotted, unblemished, undefiled,
uninjured_. adv. -līce _uncorruptly_, BH 276^20.

ungewem(med)nes f. _freedom (from stain)_.

ungewende(n)dlic _immovable_, GD, #Lcd#.

ungewendnes f. _unchangeableness_.

ungewēned _unexpected_.

ungewēnedlic _unhoped for_, GD 347^14.

un-gewērged, -gewērigod _unwearied, untiring_.

un-gewidere n., gs. -gewidres _bad weather, storm_.

ungewiderung f. _bad weather_, #ChrR# 1086.

ungewild (y) _unsubdued_, OEG.

ungewilde (y) _not subject to, independent of_, AO: _untamed,
unbridled_. [geweald]  [[listed as “+weald”]]

ungewildelic (y) _unyielding_, Æ.

un-gewill _displeasing_, #Chr#.

ungewintred _immature, young_, LL 18[26].

ungewirhtum = ungewyrhtum

ungewis = ungewiss

ungewislic _unaccustomed_, #Bo# 15^22n.

ungewīsnes f. _uncertainty, ignorance_, BH.

ungewiss I. n. _uncertainty, ignorance_, Æ, AO: _unconsciousness_:
_ignominy, shame_, #SPs# 82^15. II. adj. _uncertain_, Æ, CP: _unwise,
ignorant_: _doubtful_, Æ: _causing shame, shameful_, #KGl# 75^10.

ungewisses _unconsciously, involuntarily_, CP.

ungewītendlic _permanent, imperishable_, ÆL 34^258. adv. -līce
_permanently, perpetually_, CP 441^21.

ungewitfæstnes f. _madness_, #Lcd# 82b.

ungewitful _unwise, senseless, mad_, CP.

ungewitfulnes f. _madness_, CP 185^1.

ungewitlic _stupid, foolish_, #Lcd# 65a.

ungewītnigendlīce _freely, with impunity_, #ÆGr# 233^6n.

ungewītnod _unpunished_, Æ, CP.

ungewitt n. _folly, madness_, Æ.

ungewittig _irrational, foolish, mad_, Æ.

ungewittiglīce (-witte-) _unwisely, foolishly_, GD 2; 104.

ungewittignes f. _folly_, GD 163; 247.

ungewlitig _not bright, dull_, AS 31^10.

±ungewlitigian _to disfigure_, AS.

ungeworht _unwrought, unformed, unfinished_, Æ.

ungewriten _unwritten_, WW.

ungewuna I. m. _evil habit, vice_, CP 169^9. II. _unusual_, Æ:
_uninhabited_, Æ.

ungewunelic _unusual, strange_, Æ. [_Ger._ ungewöhnlich] adv. -līce, Æ.

ungewuniendlic _uninhabitable_, #Lcd#.

ungewyder = ungewider  [[form of “ungewidere”?]]

ungewyld- = ungewild-

ungewylles = unwilles

ungewynelic = ungewunelic

ungewyrded _uninjured_, #Ph# 181.

ungewyrhtum (be) adv. phr. _without a cause_, #CVPs#.

ungier-wan, -ian (e, i, y) _to unclothe, divest of_.

ungifre _pernicious_, #Gen# 2470.

ungifu f. _evil gift_, W.

ungin _not great or broad_, #GnE# 206.

ungl = ungel

unglad = unglæd

unglæd (a) _cheerless, dull_, #Bo# 14^14.

unglædlic _implacable_, GPH 392.

unglædnes f. ‘_imperitia_,’ WW 423^29. [mistake for unglēawnes?]

unglǣw == unglēaw

unglēaw _ignorant, foolish, unwise_, Æ. adv. -līce, CP.

unglēawnes f. _want of discernment, folly, ignorance_, #Pa# 70.

unglēawscīpe m. _folly_, #Sc# 83^16.

unglenged = ungeglenged

ungnȳðe _not niggardly, not sparing, liberal_. adv. -līce, GD (ē).

ungōd I. adj. _not good_. II. n. _evil_.

ungor = hungor

ungrāpigende _not grasping_, ÆH 1·366^27.

ungrēne _not green, bare of grass_, #Gen# 117.

ungrīpendlic _irreprehensible_, #EPs# 18^8.

ungrund _vast_, #Ex# 508.

ungrynde _bottomless_, #Rim# 49.

ungyfeðe _unaccorded_, B 2921.

un-gyld, -gylde n. _excessive tax_. [gieldan]

ungylda m. _one who is not a member of a guild_, TC 606^16.

ungylde adv. _not entitled to compensation_, LL.

ungyltig _innocent_, AO 184^9.

ungȳmen f. _carelessness_, BH.

ungȳmende _careless_, BH 434^5 (ē).

ungyrdan = ongyrdan

ungyrian = ungierwan

unhādian _to deprive of orders_, LL.

unhādod = ungehādod

unhādung f. ‘_exordinatio_,’ RBL 110^9.

unhǣl = unhāl, unhǣlu

+unhǣlan _to weaken, debilitate_, #Sc# 51^10.

unhǣlð f. _ill-health, weakness, infirmity, sickness_.

unhǣlu f. _sickness, unsoundness_, AO: _mischief, evil_, B.

unhǣmed _unmarried_, WW 530^19.

unhǣr = unhār

unhāl _sick, ill, weak_, CP.

unhālgod _unhallowed, unconsecrated_.

unhālian ‘_tabescere_,’ #BPs# 118^139.

unhālig (ǣ) _unholy, profane_, #ELPs# 42^1.

un-hālwende (RHy), -hālwendlic (Æ) _incurable deadly_.

unhandworht _not made with hands_, Mk 14^58.

unhār (= an-) _hoary, grizzled_, B 357.

unhēah (ē) _not high, low_, Æ.

unhēanlīce _valiantly_, #Chr# 755.

unhearmgeorn _inoffensive_, Æ.

unhēarsumnes = unhīersumnes

un-hēg, -hēh = unhēah

unhelde (#Chr# 1095) = unhyldo

unhelian _to uncover, reveal_, Lk 12^2.

un-hēor-, -hēr- = unhīer-

unhered _unpraised, not celebrated_, #Bo# 68^24.

unherigendlic _not praiseworthy_, ÆH 2·406^17.

unhetol _peaceable_, NC 329.

unhīere (ē, ēo, ȳ) I. _horrible, monstrous, fierce, wild, tempestuous_.
II. adv. _horribly_.

unhīerlic _wild, fierce, savage, gloomy_. adv. -līce (GD 161^10).

unhīersum (y) _disobedient_. adv. -līce.

unhīersumnes (ȳ) f. _disobedience_, CP.

unhīredwist f. _unfamiliarity_, #Sc# 203^13.

unhīwe _formless_, GPH 399^259.

unhīwed _colourless_, OEG.

unhlēowe _unfriendly, chill_, #Ex# 494.

unhlīdan (Æ) = onhlīdan

unhlīs (unhlīse?) _infamous, disreputable_, #KGl# 68^42.

unhlīsa m. _ill-fame, discredit, dishonour_, Æ.

unhlīsbǣre _disreputable_, WW 354^17.

unhlīsēadig _infamous_, WW 420^15.

unhlīsful _infamous_, #Gl#.

unhlīsig _infamous_, #KGl# 56^5.

unhlitme (B 1129) = unflitme?

unhlūd _not loud_, GD 85^5.

unhlȳs- = unhlīs-

unhnēaw † _generous, liberal_.

unhoga _foolish_, MkL 7^18.

unhold _disloyal, unfriendly, hostile_, Æ. [_Ger._ unhold]

unholda m. _monster, devil_, #Cr# 762.

unhrædsprǣce _slow of speech_, Æ (#Ex# 6^30).

unhrēoflig _not leprous_, ÆH 1·124^24.

unhrōr _not bent down, erect_, #Bo# 146^26.

unhūfed _bareheaded_, OEG 4466.

unhwearfiende _unchangeable, fixed_, #Bo# 20^29.

unhwīlen † _eternal_.

unhȳdig _ignorant, foolish_.

unhȳhst = unhēhst superl. of unhēh.  [[under “unhēah”]]

unhyldo (e) f. _displeasure, disfavour, unfriendliness_, CP. [_Ger._
unhuld]

unhyr- = onhier-, onhyr-

unhȳr- = unhīer-

unhȳðig † _unhappy_.

uni- = unge-

unīeð adv. (comp.) _with greater difficulty, more hardly_, CP. [ēað]

unīeð- = unēað-

unin-seglian, -sæglian (Æ) _to unseal_.

unīðe = unīeðe  [[redirected to “unēathe”]]

uniucian = ungeocian

unlāb = unlāf

unlācnigendlic _incurable_, #Lcd# 1·262^1.

unlācnod _unhealed_, CP 61^4.

unlǣc = unlēac

unlǣce m. _bad physician_, #Lcd# 60b.

un-lǣd, -lǣde _poor, miserable, wretched, unhappy, unfortunate_:
_accursed, wicked_: _straying_? (_of cattle_).

unlǣdlic _miserable_, NC 329. adv. -līce.

unlǣgne = unlīegne

unlǣne _permanent_, W 264^18.

unlǣred _unlearned, untaught, ignorant_, CP.

unlǣrednes f. _want of learning_.

unlæt _unwearied, indefatigable_.

unlætto f. _sin_, GD 289. [unlǣd]

unlāf f. _posthumous child_, WW.

unlagu f. _abuse of law, bad law, oppression, injustice_. æt unlagum
_unlawfully_.

unland m. _desert, waste_: _counterfeit, supposed land_, #Whale# 13.

unlandāgende m. _not owning land_, LL 112.

unlār f. _bad teaching_.

unlēac pret. 3 sg. of onlūcan.  [[from first edition]]

unlēafful = ungelēafful

unleahtorwyrðe _not culpable_, #PPs# 18^7.

unlēanod _unpaid_, EC 148^4.

unlēas _not false, true_. adv. -līce.

unlēcð = unlȳcð pres. 3 sg. of unlūcan.

unlēfedlic = unlȳfendlic  [[headword spelled “unlyfendlic”]]

unlēgne = unlīegne

unlēof † _not dear, hated_.

unleoðuwāc (e^3) _inflexible, rigid, stubborn_.

unleoðuwācnes f. _inflexibility_, WW.

unlesan = unlīesan

unlib- = unlyb-

unlic = ungelic  [[headword spelled “ungelīc”]]

unlīchamlic _incorporeal_, Æ, GD.

unlīcð (Æ) = unlȳeð pres. 3 sg. of unlūcan.

unlīcwyrðe _displeasing_, ÆL 23b^374.

unlīefed = unālīefed  [[under “unālȳfed”]]

unlīegne (ǣ, ē) _not to be questioned_, LL.

unlīesan (ē, ȳ) _to unloose_, Æ: _set free, put on a free footing_.

unlīf n. _death_, MFH 176.

unlīfes _dead_, ÆL 18·203.

unlifiende, unlifigende (y) _unliving, lifeless, dead_. [libban]

unlītel = unlȳtel

unlīðe _ungentle, harsh, severe_, Æ.

unliðowāc = unleoðuwāc

unlofod _unpraised_.

unlond = unland

unlūcan^2 _to unlock, open_, Æ.

unlust m. _evil desire, lust, sensuality_, Æ: _disinclination,
weariness_. [_Ger._ unlust]

+unlustian _to loathe_, #Bl# 59^8.

unlyb-ba m., -be f. _poisonous drug, poison_, Æ: _witchcraft_, Æ. [lybb]

unlybbende (MH 164^21) = unlifigende  [[under “unlifiende”]]

unlybwyrhta m. _worker with spells or poisons, wizard_, Æ.

unlȳfednes = unālīefednes  [[redirected to “unālȳfednes”]]

unlyfendlic _illicit, unlawful_, ZDA 31^8.

unlyfigende = unlifigende  [[under “unlifiende”]]

unlyft f. _bad air_, #Lcd# 6a.

unlygen _unlying, truthful_, LL 156[12].

unlȳsan (Æ) = unlīesan

unlȳt n. _a great deal_, #PPs# 61^9.

unlȳtel _not small, much, great, very large_.

unmǣdlīce = unmǣðlīce

unmǣg? m. _evil kinsman_? _alien_? #Wald# 2^23.

unmǣge _not akin_, #PPs# 68^8.

unmægel = unmeagol

unmægnes f. _weariness_, WW 224^14.

unmægðlīce = unmǣðlīce

unmæht- (N) = unmiht-

unmǣle _unspotted, immaculate, pure, virgin_.

unmǣne _not criminal, honest, innocent, truthful_: _free (from)_.

un-mǣre, -mǣrlic _inglorious_, #Bo#.

unmǣte _excessive, immense, great, vast_, Æ: _countless, innumerable_.

unmǣtlic _enormous_, A 4·152.

unmǣtnes f. _vastness, excessive greatness_, BH.

unmǣð f. _transgression, sin_, HL 13·234.

unmǣðful _immoderate, excessive_, NC 329.

unmǣðlic _excessive_, Æ. adv. -līce _excessively_, Æ: _unmercifully,
cruelly_, Æ.

un-maga m., -magu f. _needy person, dependent, orphan_.

unmanig _not many, few_.

unmann m. _monster, wicked man_, Æ.

un-meagol, -meahl _insipid_, WW.

unmeaht = unmiht

unmedeme (Æ) = unmedome

unmedome (u^3) _incompetent, unfit, unworthy_, CP.

unmedomlīce adv. _negligently, carelessly_.

unmeht = unmiht

unmeltung f. _indigestion_, #Lcd# 95a.

unmendlinga = unmyndlinga

unmēne = unmǣne

unmenged _unmixed_.

unmenn nap. of unmann.

unmenniselic _inhuman_, #Bo# 70^26.

unmet- = unmǣt-

unmīdlod _unrestrained, unbridled_, CP.

unmidome = unmedome

unmiht (ie) I. f. _weakness_, CP. II. (æ) _impossible_, MtL.

+unmiht _without strength_, ÆL 25^771.

un-mihtelic, -mihtlic _impossible_.

unmihtig (æ, e) _weak, powerless_, Æ: _impossible_, NG.

unmihtignes f. _weakness_, #Lcd#.

unmilde _not meek, harsh_, BH 100^29.

unmildheort _merciless_, Æ.

unmilts f. _severity, anger_, Ct.

unmiltsigendlic _unworthy of compassion, unpardonable_, Æ. [milts]

unmiltsung f. _hardness of heart_, AO 64^16.

unmirigð = unmyrhð

unmōd n. _depression_, #Lcd# 65a.

unmōdig _humble_, CP: _timid_.

unmolsniendlic _uncorrupted_, OEG 60.

un-monig, -moneg = unmanig

unmurn _untroubled_, #PPs# 75^4.

unmurnlīce † adv. _unpityingly, without sorrowing_.

unmycel _small_, GD 133^7.

unmyhtig = unmihtig

unmylts- = unmilds-

unmyndgian = unmynegian

unmynd-linga, -lenga, -lunga adv. _unawares, unexpectedly_, Æ, AO:
_undesignedly_.

unmynegian _to overlook, not to demand_, LL 382[43].

unmyrge _unpleasant_? _sad_? WW 211^16.

unmyrhð f. _sadness_, W 148^9.

unna m. = unne

±unnan pres. 1 sing. an(n), on(n), pl. unnon; pret. sg. ūðe, pp. ±unnen
swv. w. d. pers. and g. thing _to grant, allow, bestow, give_, #Bo,
Chr#; AO, CP, Æ. unnendre handa _voluntarily_: _be glad to see, wish,
desire_. [‘_i-unne_’]

unne f. _favour, approval, permission, consent_: _grant_: _liberality_.

unnēah adj. adv. _not near, far, away from_.

un-nēde, -nēdig = unnīedig

unnēdelīce (GD 346^9; JAW 55, 56) = ungnȳðelīce  [[form of “ungnȳðe”]]

unnēg, unnēh = unnēah

unnend m. _one who grants_, DR 5^5.

unnet = unnyt

unnīed-ig, -enga adv. _without compulsion or restraint, willingly_, CP.
[nēad]

unnit = unnyt II.

unnīðing m. _honest man (not an outlaw)_, #Chr# 1087; v. ANS 117·22.

un-nyt, -nytt I. adj. _useless, unprofitable_, Æ, CP. II. m.
_unprofitableness, emptiness, vanity, folly_.

unnytenes = unnytnes

unnytlic _useless, unprofitable, foolish_, CP. adv. -līce.

unnytlicnes f. _uselessness_, #Lcd#.

unnytnes f. _unprofitableness, frivolity, emptiness_.

unnytwyrðe _unprofitable, useless_, Æ, CP. adv. -wurðlīce, Æ.

unofercumen _unsubdued_, #Gl#.

unoferfēre (oe^4) _impassable_, #Gl#.

unoferhrēfed _not roofed in_, #Bl# 125^21.

unoferswið-ed, -edlic, -ende, -endlic _unconquerable, invincible_.

unoferwin-nene, -nendlic _invincible_.

unoferwrigen _not covered_, ÆL 23b^209.

unoferwunnen _unconquered_, AO 156^28.

unoferwunnendlic = unoferwinnendlic  [[under “unoferwinnene”]]

unoflinnedlīce _unceasingly_, NC 329.

unofslegen _not killed_, ÆH 2·544^31.

unondcȳðignes f. _ignorance_, #JVPs# 24^7.

unondgetful = unandgytful

unonlȳsendlic _unpardonable_, GD 348^4.

unonstyred _unmoved_, GD 270^9n.

unonstyrigendlic _motionless_.

unonwend-endlic, -edlic _unchangeable, constant, immovable_. adv. -līce.

unorne _old, worn out, decrepit_, #Ma# 256.

unornlic _old, worn_, Æ.

unplēolic _not dangerous, safe_, Æ. adv. -līce.

unrǣd m. _folly, foolish plan_: _crime, mischief, injury, plot_, Æ, AO.

unrǣden f. _ill-considered act_, #Gen# 982.

unrǣdfæst _unreliable, incompetent_, ÆP 212^15.

unrǣdfæstlīce _unwisely, rashly_, Æ.

unrǣdlic _thoughtless_, #Bl# 99^21. adv. -līce, Æ.

unrǣdsīð m. _foolish enterprise_, #Rd# 12^4.

unræfniendlic _intolerable_, #SPs# 123^4 (on-).

unreht == unriht

unrehthǣmdere = unrihthǣmere

unreordlic _insatiable_.

±unrētan _to make sad_, AO. [rōt]

unrētu f. _sadness_, A 4·165.

unrēðe _not cruel, gentle_, ÆH 2·44^25.

unrīce _poor_, LL, RB.

unriht (e, y) I. n. _wrong, sin, vice, wickedness, evil_, Æ: _injustice,
oppression_, Æ. II. adj. _wrong, unrighteous, wicked, false_:
_unlawful_.

unrihtcyst f. _vice_, LL (262^28).

unrihtdǣd f. _evil doing_.

unrihtdǣde _iniquitous_, #LPs# 9^24.

unrihtdēma m. _unjust judge_, W.

unrihtdōm m. _iniquity_, #Da# 183.

unrihtdōnd m. _evildoer_, #Bl# 63^15.

unrihte adv. _unjustly, wrongly_.

unrihtfēoung f. _unrighteous hate_, #Met# 27^1.

unrihtful _unrighteous, wicked_, NC 329.

unrihtgestrēon n. _unrighteous gain_, #Bl# 63^8.

unrihtgestrod n. _ill-gotten, booty_, NC 330.

unrihtgewilnung (y) = unrihtwilnung
  [[headword spelled “unrihtwillnung”]]

unrihtgilp m. _vainglory_, LL (262^27).

unrihtgītsung f. _wrongful greed_.

unrihthǣman _to fornicate, commit adultery_.

unrihthǣmdere (#VPs# 49^18) = unrihthǣmere

unrihthǣmed I. n. _fornication, adultery_. II. adj. _adulterous_.

unrihthǣmedfremmere m. _adulterer_, NC 330.

unrihthǣmend m. _adulterer_, #Bl# 63.

unrihthǣmere m. _fornicator, adulterer_, Æ.

unrihthǣmeð = unrihthǣmed I.

unrihthēmere (#KGl#) = unrihthǣmere

unrihtlic (e, y) _unjust, unrighteous, wrongful, wicked_, Æ. adv. -līce.

unrihtlust m. _unlawful desire_, #Bo# 19^20.

unrihtlyblāc nm. _unlawful magic_, W 253^11.

unrihtnes (e^2) f. _wrong, unrighteousness, wickedness_, #Bl#.

unrihttīd f. _wrong time, improper occasion_, MFH 177.

unrihtweorc n. _secular work done on Sunday_, LL (130^25).

unrihtwīf n. _unlawful consort, mistress_, TC 373^29.

unrihtwīfung f. _unlawful wedlock_, BH 116^3.

unrihtwillend m. _evil-disposed person_, CP 89^22 (y^2).

unrihtwillnung f. _unlawful desire, lust, ambition_, CP.

unrihtwīs _unrighteous, wrong, unjust_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce.

unrihtwīsnes (e, y) f. _injustice, unrighteousness, iniquity_, Æ,
CP (y).

unrihtwrīgels n. _covering of error_, #Bl# 105^30.

unrihtwyrcend m. _evildoer_, #Bl#.

unrihtwyrhta m. _evildoer_, CP(y^2).

unrīm I. n. _countless number, huge host, large quantity, mass_. II. =
unrīme

unrīme _countless, innumerable_.

unrīmfolc n. _countless number (of people)_, CP 51^12.

unrīpe _immature, unripe_, #Gl#.

unrōt _sad, dejected_, Æ, CP: _displeased, angry_.

unrōtian _to become sad_: (±) _make sad_.

unrōtlic _sad, gloomy_. adv. -līce.

unrōtmōd _sad-hearted_, #Bl# 113^12.

unrōtnes f. _sadness, contrition, disquietude_, Æ, CP.

±unrōtsian _to be or become sad, be grieved_, Æ: _make sad_.

unrūh _smooth, without seams_, JnLR 19^23.

unryht (AO, CP) == unriht

unrȳne m. _diarrhæa_, #Lcd# 1·172^12.

unsac _not accused of anything, innocent_, #Lcd# 3·288^6.

unsadelod _not saddled_, LL.

unsæd _unsated, insatiable_, #PPs# 100^5.

unsǣd n. _evil seed_, W 40^23.

unsæht = unseht

unsǣl m. _unhappiness_, W 236^26.

unsǣlan _to untie, unfasten_.

unsǣle _wicked_, WW 421^23.

unsǣlig _unfortunate, unhappy, wretched_: _mischievous, pernicious_,
#Gen# 637: _wicked_.

unsǣlð f. _unhappiness, misfortune, adversity, misery_, CP.

unsæpig _sapless_, ÆH 1·102^4.

unsalt = unsealt

unsamwrǣde _contrary, incongruous_, #Bo# 106^6.

unsār _painless_, CP.

unsāwen _unsown_, LL 450[10].

unscæðed (e^2) _uninjured_.

unscæðful (e, ea) _innocent_. adv. -līce, CP.

unscæðfulnes (ea, e) f. _innocence_, CP.

unscæðð-ednes, -ignes (e) f. _harmlessness, innocence_, Æ.

unscæðð-ende (e), -ig _innocent, harmless_.

unscamfæst _impudent, shameless_, #Gl#.

unscamfulnes f. _shamelessness, immodesty_, MkL 7^20 (eo).

unscamig _unashamed_, #Jul# 552.

unscamlic _shameless, immodest_, Æ. adv. -līce.

unscað- = unscæð(ð)-

un-scēadelīce, -scēadlīce _unreasonably_.

unscēadwīslic _unreasonable_, ÆH 2·210^30.

unsceaft f. _monster_? #Rd# 88^32.

unsceam- = unscam-

unscearp _not sharp (of wine)_, #Lcd#.

unscearpnes f. _dulness_, BH 402^29.

unscearpsȳne _not sharp-sighted_, #Lcd# 11b.

unsceað- = unscæð-

unscelleht (= ie) _not furnished with a shell_, #Lcd# 33b.

unscende (y) † _not discreditable, blameless, glorious_.

un-scended, -scendende _uninjured, uncorrupted_.

unscennan _to unharness_, WW 91^13.

unscēod = unscōd pp. of unscōgan.

unscēogan = unscōgan

unsceom- (NG) = unscam-

unscēotan (WW 190^30) = onscēotan

unsceð- = unscæð-

unscildig (Æ) == unscyldig

unscirped _unclothed_, MtL 22^11.

unscōgan _to unshoe_, Æ, CP. pp. unscōd _unshod_.

unscom- = unscam-

unscoren _unshorn_.

unscortende _not failing_, LkLR 12^33.

unscrȳdan (ē^2, ī^2) _to put off (clothes)_, _undress, strip, deprive
of_, Æ. unscrȳdd pp. _naked_. [scrūd]

unscyld f. _innocency_, #SPs# 40^13.

unscyldgung f. _innocence_, #ERPs# 17^25.

unscyldig (i) _guiltless, innocent_, Æ, CP: _not responsible_.

unscyldiglic _excusable_, #Bl# 189^32. adv. -līce _innocently_, #Bk# 12.

unscyldignes f. _innocence_.

unscynde = unscende

unscȳrdan = unscrȳdan

unscyttan _to undo, unbolt_, ÆL 31^863.

unscyðende = unsceððende  [[under “unscæððende”]]

unseald _ungiven_, HL 10^495.

unsealt (a, y) _unsalted, insipid_.

unsēfernes = unsȳfernes

unsefful ‘_insensatus_,’ RHy 6^31. [sefa]

unseht I. mfn. _discord, disagreement, quarrel_. II. adj. _not agreed,
hostile_, #Chr#.

unsehtnes f. _discord, quarrel_, NC 330.

un-seldan, -seldon (Æ) _not seldom, repeatedly, frequently_.

unsēofene _not sighing_, MFH 177.

unsewenlic _invisible_, #Bo# 138^2.

unsibb f. _dissension, contention, war, strife_, AO.

unsibbian _to disagree_, WW.

unsibsumnes f. _anxiety_, JnL p6^1.

unsideful _immodest, unchaste_.

unsidefullnes f. _immodesty_.

unsidelice _immodestly_, NC 330.

unsidu m. _bad custom, vice, impurity_. [_Ger._ unsitte]

unsīf- = unsȳf-

unsigefæst _not victorious_, ÆL 18^44.

unsingian = unsyngian

unsīð m. _unfortunate journey or expedition, misfortune, mishap_, Æ.

unslǣpig _sleepless_, WW 427^15.

unslāw (æ, ea) _not slow, active_. adv. -līce, CP 381^1.

unsleac _not remiss, active, diligent_. adv. -līce.

unsleacnes f. _diligence_.

unslēaw = unslāw

unslid? unslit (Cp 33#s#) n. _fat, grease, tallow_. [_Ger._ unschlitt;
or ?= unsylt]

unslitten _untorn_, JnL 19^23.

unslȳped _open, unloosed_, W 83^9.

unsmǣðe = unsmēðe

unsmeoruwig _not greasy_, #Lcd# 106b (smerig).

unsmēðe _not smooth, uneven, rough, scabby_.

unsmēðnes f. _roughness_, WW.

unsmōð = unsmēðe

unsnotor (e^3) _unwise_. adv. -līce.

unsnotornes- (yter-) f. _folly_.

unsnott- = unsnot-

unsnyttru f. _folly, ignorance_.

unsnyttrum † adv. _foolishly_.

unsoden not boiled or cooked.

unsōfte _harshly, bitterly, severely, violently_, Æ: _with difficulty,
hardly, scarcely_: _uncomfortably_.

unsōftlīce _harshly_, ÆH 1·434^7.

unsōm f. _disagreement_, LL.

unsorh _free from care_, #Bl# 217^29.

unsōð I. adj. _untrue, false_. II. n. _untruth, falsehood_.

unsōðfæst _untruthful_: _unjust, unrighteous_.

unsōðfæstnes f. _injustice, unrighteousness_.

±unsōðian _to falsify, disprove_.

unsōðsag-ol, -ul _untruthful_, Æ.

unspannan^7 _to unfasten_, WW 231^35.

unspecende = unsprecende

unspēd f. _want, poverty_.

unspēdig _poor_, Æ, AO: _not fertile_.

unspiwol _that stops vomiting_? #Lcd#.

unspornend = onspornend

unsprecende _not able to speak_, Æ.

unstæfwīs _illiterate_, GPH 393.

unstæððig _unstable, irregular, weak, frivolous, wanton_, Æ.

unstæððignes f. _instability, inconstancy, wantonness_, Æ.

unstaðolfæst _unstable, unenduring, weak, fickle_, Æ.

unstaðolfæstnes f. _instability, weakness, fickleness_, Æ.

unstenc m. _stench, stink_.

unstille _moving, changeable, restless, inquiet, uneasy_, CP.

+unstillian _to disturb, agitate_, BH 278^10.

un-stilnes, -stillnes f. _agitation, restlessness, disturbance,
disquiet, trouble, disorder, tumult_, Æ, AO.

unstrang _not strong, weak, infirm, feeble_, Æ.

unstrangian _to be feeble_.

unstrangnes f. _feebleness_.

unstrenge _weak_, ÆH 2·390^26.

unstydful _inconstant, apostate_, DR 121^10. [= unstede-]

unstydfullnes (on-) f. _instability_, DR.

unstyrendlic _immovable, hard to carry_, MtL 23^4.

unstyriende _immovable, stationary_, #Bo#.

unswǣs _unpleasant, disagreeable, uncongenial_. adv. -swǣse.

unswǣslic _ungentle, cruel_, #Jud# 65. [swǣs]

unswefn n. _bad dream_, #Lcd# 3·288^21.

unsweotol _imperceptible, indistinct_.

unswēte _not sweet_: _foul_.

unswicen _unbetrayed, unharmed, safe_, #Chr# 1048.

un-swicende, -swiciende _true, faithful_.

unswicol _trustworthy, true_.

unswīð _not strong_, #Lcd#. adv. -swīðe.

unsydeful = unsideful

unsȳferlic _impure_, #Bl# 43^17.

unsȳfernes f. _impurity, foulness_.

unsȳfre (ī) I. adj. _impure, unclean, filthy_. II. adv. _filthily_, #Cr#
1484?

unsylt = unsealt

unsyngian _to exculpate_, LL 98[21,1].

unsynnig _guiltless, innocent_, Æ.

unsynnum adv. _guiltlessly_, B 1072.

untǣle _blameless, faultless_, Æ.

untǣled _unblamed_, CP 351^20.

untǣllic (ā) _blameless, immaculate, undefiled, praiseworthy_. adv.
-līce, Æ, CP.

untǣl-wierðe (y^3) _blameless_, CP. adv. -wierðlīce.

untæslic = unðæslic

untāl- = untǣl-

untala (NG) = untela

untamcul _untameable_, GPH 397.

unteala = untela

unteald _uncounted_, #Lcd# 3·264^11.

untealt _stable, steady_, #Chr# 897#d#.

untela adv. _not well, amiss, badly, ill, improperly, wrongly_, CP.

untellendlic _indescribable_.

untemed _untamed_, #CPs#, WW.

untēmende = untȳmende

untēnan (#KGl#) = ontȳnan

untēogoðad _untithed_, CP 439^29.

unteola = untela

untēorig _untiring, unceasing_, #Met# 28^17.

untīdǣt _untimely eating_, NC 330.

untīdfyl f. _untimely eating or drinking_, W 46^14.

untīdgewidere n. _unseasonable weather_, #Chr# 1095.

untīdlic _unseasonable_, AO. adv. -līce.

untīdspǣc f. _untimely speech_, LL (322^9).

untīdweorc n. _work at an improper time (e.g. on Sunday)_, W.

untīena (AO) = ontēona

untīgan _to untie, loosen, unchain_, Æ. [tēag]

untilad _destitute_, #Bo# 16^12.

untīma m. _unseasonableness, wrong time_, CP: _bad time, misfortune_, W
297^7.

untīme _ill-timed, unfortunate_, Æ.

untīmnes f. _evil times_, W 207^18.

untīnan = ontȳnan

untōbrocen _unbroken_, Æ.

untōclofen _uncloven_, ÆL 25^45.

untōdǣled _undivided, individual, indivisible, inseparable_.

untōdǣledlic _inseparable, indivisible_, Æ. adv. -līce.

untōdǣlednes f. _undividedness_, A 8·318^17.

untō-dǣlend-, dǣl-, dāl-, -dēlen- = untō-dǣled-

untōlǣtendlīce _incessantly_, GD 117^23.

untō-lēsende, -lȳsende _that cannot be loosed, inextricable_, WW.

untōlȳsendlic _unforgivable_, GD 342^26.

untōsceacen _unshaken_.

untōslegen _unshattered_, AS 22^8.

untōsliten _untorn, uninjured_, CP.

untōsprecendlic _ineffable_, TC.

untōtwǣmed _undivided_, Æ.

untōworpenlic (e^2, a^4) _inviolable_, OEG 11^153.

untrāglīce _frankly_, #El# 410.

untrēow = untrēowð

untrēowe (ȳ) _untrue, unfaithful_.

untrēowfǣst (ȳ) _unfaithful, unreliable_.

untrēowlīce _faithlessly_, AO.

untrēowsian _to defraud, deceive_, CP: _offend_, G.

untrēowð f. _unfaithfulness, treachery_, AO.

untrum _infirm, weakly, sick, ill_, Æ, CP.

untrumian _to be or become sick or infirm_: _make weak_, Æ.

untrumlic _infirm, weak_, Æ.

untrumnes f. _weakness, sickliness, infirmity, illness_, Æ, AO, CP.

untrymed _unconfirmed (by a bishop)_, LL (140^19).

un-trymig, -trymmig _sick, infirm_, NG.

untrymigan _to become weak_, JnL 6^2.

untrymmigo f. _illness_, MtL 10^1.

untrymnes = untrumnes

untrymð f. _weakness, illness_.

untrȳw- = untrēow-

untwēgendlīce = untwēogendlīce

untwēo m. _certainty_, #Cr# 961.

untwēod _undoubting_, #An# 1244.

untweofeald = untwiefeald

untwēogende _unhesitating, not doubting_, CP.

untwēogendlic _indubitable, certain_. adv. -līce _indubitably,
unhesitatingly, undoubtingly_, AO, CP.

untwēolic (ī) _undoubted_, OEG. adv. -līce _certainly, with
certainty_, Æ.

untwēonde = untwēogende

untwēon(d)līce = untwēogendlīce

untwēonigend (ȳ) _undoubting_, A 9·115^45.

untwī- = untwēo-

untwȳ- = untwie-

  [[Printed on one line:
  untwī-, untwȳ- = untwēo-, untwie-]]

untwie-feald, -feld _not double_, CP: _not double-minded, without
duplicity, sincere_, CP.

untȳd _unskilful, inexperienced_, CP.

untyddre = untȳdre

untȳdlic = untīdlic

untȳdre I. _firm, unbending_, #An# 1254. II. m. monster, B 111.

untȳdrende _barren_, #Lcd# 33b.

untȳgian = untīgan

untygða _unsuccessful (in getting one’s wish)_, CP 257^18.

untȳmende _barren, unfruitful_, Æ. [tīeman]

untȳnan = ontȳnan

untȳned _unfenced_, LL 106[40].

untȳð = untygð  [[form of “untygða”?]]

unðærfe in phr. ‘unðærfe ðing’ ‘_nequaquam_’ MtL 2^6. [unðearf]

unðæslic _inappropriate, unseemly, unbecoming, absurd_, Æ. adv.
-līce, Æ.

unðæslicnes f. _impropriety_, ÆH 2·316^8.

unðæslicu f. _incongruity_, RB 124^13.

unðanc m. _ingratitude, disinclination, displeasure_, Æ, AO, CP: _evil
intention, an ill turn_, Æ. his unðances _against his will,
involuntarily_. [_Ger._ undank]

unðancful _unthankful_, CP, GD.

unðanc-ol, -ul _ungrateful_, NC 330.

unðanc-wurðe, -wyrðe _ungrateful_: _not acceptable, disagreeable_, Æ.

unðancwyrðlīce _ungratefully_, NC 330.

unðearf f. _damage, hurt, detriment, ruin_, Æ.

unðearfes _without a cause_, #PPs# 13^6.

unðēaw m. _vice, sin, fault_, Æ, CP.

unðēawfæst _disorderly, ill-mannered, dissolute_, Æ. adv. -līce.

unðēawful _uncontrolled, disorderly_, WW.

unðegenlīce _basely_.

unðinged _unexpected, sudden_, CP.

unðingod _unatoned for_, CP 423^35.

unðolemōdnes f. _impatience_.

unðoligendlic _intolerable_, #Sc# 208^14.

unðorfæst _unprofitable_, DR 179^17.

un-ðrīste, -ðrīeste _diffident_, CP.

unðrōwendlicnes f. _impassibility_, ZDA 31·14.

unðrōwigendlic _unsuffering_, Æ.

unðurhsceotendlic _impenetrable_.

unðurhtogen _unperformed, neglected_, CP 329^14.

unðwægen = unðwogen

unðwǣre = ungeðwǣre

+unðwǣrian _to disagree_, Æ, CP.

unðwǣrnes f. (ē) _discord, division_, #Chr#.

un-ðwean, -ðwagen, -ðwægen, -ðwegen, -ðwēn = unðwogen

unðwērnes = unðwǣrnes

unðwogen _unwashed_.

unðyhtig _weak_, OET 107.

unðyldig = ungeðyldig

unðyldlicnes f. _difficulty_, BH 2·340.

unundergilde (a^2) _invaluable_, #Bo# 27^20.

unwāclic † _steadfast, strong, noble, splendid_, adv. -līce.

unwǣded (ē) _not clothed_, MtL 22^11.

unwæder = unweder

unwælgrim _gentle, merciful_, GD 133^6.

unwæm- = unwem-

unwær (-war- in obl. cases) _incautious, careless, unthinking, foolish_,
Æ, CP: _unaware, unexpected_. on un-wær, -waran, -warum _unawares,
unexpectedly_.

unwæres = unwares

unwærlic _unwary, heedless_, CP. adv. -līce, Æ, AO, CP.

unwærnes f. _heedlessness_, W 299^7.

unwærscipe m. _folly_, ÆL 1·68^4.

unwæscen _unwashen_, #Lcd# 41b.

unwæstm mfn. _barrenness_: _tare, weed_.

unwæstmbǣre _unfruitful, barren, sterile_, Æ, CP.

unwæstm-bǣrnes (Æ, AO), -berendnes (Æ) f. _unfruitfulness, barrenness,
sterility_.

umwæstmberend-e, -lic _sterile_.

unwæstmfæst _barren_, #Bl# 163^17.

unwæstmfæstnes f. _barrenness_, #Bl# 163^17.

unwæterig _waterless, dry, desert_.

unwandiende _unhesitating_, CP 381^25.

unwar- v. unwær.

unwares adv. _unawares_. [gs. of unwær]

unwarnod _unwarned_, LL 382^33.

unwealt _steady, stable_, #Chr# 897.

unwearnum † adv. _irresistibly_: _suddenly, in a moment_.

unwearð = unweorð

unweaxen † _not grown up, young_.

unwēded = unwǣded

unweder n. _bad weather, storm_, Æ.

unwederlīce adv. _tempestuously_, Mt 16^3.

unweg = onweg

unwegen _not weighed_, #Lcd# 1·376^7.

unwemlic _unsullied, pure_, WW 522^35.

un-wemme, -wemmed _unblemished, unstained, unspotted, uninjured_, Æ:
_inviolate_.

unwemmend m. _innocent man_, #REPs# 36^18 (on-).

unwemming f. _incorruptibility, incorruption_, #Sc# 41^10.

unwemnes f. _purity_, HL 18^422.

+unwendnes = onwendnes  [[under “onwendednes”]]

unwēne _unexpected_: _hopeless_, Æ.

umwēned _unexpected_.

unwēnlic adj. _unpromising, hopeless, desperate_, AO, CP. adv. -līce
_unexpectedly, by chance_, GD 88^17.

unwēnunga _unexpectedly_, #Bo# 140^10.

unwēod n. _ill weed_, W 92^19.

unweoder = unweder

unweorcheard _delicate, weakly, infirm_, RB 75^8.

unweorclic (o) _unsuitable for work_, A 8·319^30.

unweorð (AO) = unwierðe

unweorðian (o, u) _to slight, treat with contempt, dishonour_, CP: (±)
_become worthless, vile, dishonour oneself_.

unweorðlic (u) _unworthy, dishonourable_, AO: _unimportant, humble_, CP.
adv. -līce _unworthily, dishonourably, ignominiously_, AO, CP:
_indignantly_.

unweorðnes f. _slight, contempt, disgrace_, AO, CP.

unweorðscipe m. _dishonour, disgrace_: _indignation_, CP 222^9.

unweorðung (u) f. _disgrace_: _indignation_, CP 222^12.

unweotod = unwitod

unwer (#KGl#) = unwær

unwered _unprotected_, #Gen# 812.

unwērig _unwearying, indefatigable, persistent_, Æ, AO.

unwerlīce = unwærlīce

unwerod _not sweet_, CP 447^19.

unwestm = unwæstm

unweðer = unweder

unwīd _not wide_, NC 330.

unwidere n. _bad weather_, W.

unwīdlod _unpolluted_, DR 90^17.

unwierðe I. adj. _unworthy_, CP: _worthless_: _contemptible,
ignominious_. II. adv.

unwīese = unwīse, unwīslīce

unwilla m. _repugnance, displeasure_.

unwillan = unwillum

unwillende _unwilling, involuntary_, CP.

unwilles adv. _unwillingly, involuntarily, reluctantly_, Æ.

unwillum adv. _unwillingly, reluctantly_. his unwillum _against his
will_, AO: _involuntarily, unintentionally_.

unwilsumlīce adv. _involuntarily, against one’s will_, BH 442^23.

unwindan^3 (= on-) _to unwind, uncover_, Æ.

unwine m. _foe, enemy_.

unwinsum = unwynsum

unwīs _unwise, foolish, ignorant, uninformed_, CP.

unwīsdōm m. _unwisdom, imprudence, folly, ignorance_, CP.

unwīse = unwīslīce

unwīslic _foolish_. adv. -līce, Æ.

unwīsnes f. _ignorance_: _wickedness_, DR.

unwita m. _witless person, ignoramus_.

unwitende _unwitting, ignorant_, AO.

unwītnigendlīce _without punishment, with impunity_, #ÆGr# 233^6.

unwītnod _unpunished_, CP.

unwītnung f. _impunity_, #Sc# 235^5.

unwitod (io, u) _uncertain_.

unwittig _unconscious, ignorant, stupid_, Æ.

unwittignes f. _folly_, GD 163^34.

unwittol _ignorant_, #Sc# 80^12.

unwitweorc n. _foolish work_, #Bl# 111^2.

unwiðerweard _friendly_, CP 361^20.

unwiðerweardlic _not discordant_, NC 330.

unwiðmetenes f. _incomparability_, OEG 587.

unwiðmetenlic _not comparable, incomparable_, Æ. adv. -līce.

unwlite m. _dishonour_, WW.

unwliteg = unwlitig

unwlitegian _to become disfigured_, CP: _disfigure, transform_, CP.

unwlitegung f. _disfigurement_, WW 391^5.

unwlitig _unsightly, deformed, disfigured, ill-favoured_, Æ.

unwlitignes f. _disfigurement_, BH 384^4.

unworclic = unweorclic

unworht _unwrought, unfinished_.

unworðian = unweorðian

unwrænc = unwrenc

unwrǣne _not lustful_, #Lcd#.

un-wrǣst, -wrǣste (ē) _feeble, weakly_, AO: _unsteady, untrustworthy_.

unwrǣstlīce adv. _weakly, incongruously_, A 8·334^18.

unwrecen _unpunished, unavenged_.

unwrenc (æ) m. _vice, evil design_, Æ, CP.

unwrēon^1,2 _to uncover, reveal_.

unwrēst = unwrǣst

un-wrigednes, -wrigennes f. _uncovering, revelation_.

unwrigen _open, unconcealed_, MFH 101^7 (pp. of unwrēon).

unwriten _unwritten_, #Bo#.

unwrītere m. _incorrect copyist_, #ÆGr# 3^24.

unwrīðan _to untwist, unbind_, CP.

unwunden I. _not wound_. II. pp. of unwindan.

unwundod _not wounded_, #Gen# 183.

unwuniendlic _uninhabitable_, #Lcd# 3·262.

unwurð == unweorð

unwuted = unwitod

unwynsum _unpleasant_, Æ.

unwynsumnes f. _unpleasantness_, Æ.

unwyrcan _to undo, destroy_.

unwyrd f. _misfortune, trouble_.

unwyrtrumian _to root out_, MtL 13^29.

unwyrð- = unweorð-

unwyrðe = unwierðe

unymb-fangen, -fangenlic _incomprehensible_, GD.

unymbwendedlic _unalterable_, DR 164^16.

unymbwriten _indescribable_, GD 268^24.

unȳð- = unēað-

unȳðgian _to trouble_, #EPs# 34^15.

ūp [S 122] adv. _‘up’ (to a place), up stream, up country (inland)_:
_upwards_. lǣtan ūp _to put ashore_. ūp forlǣtan _divide_.

ūpāberan^1 _to bear up_.

ūpāblāwan^7 _to blow up, be in eruption (of a volcano)_, ÆL 8^222.

ūpābrecan^4 _to break out, break through, boil up_, Æ.

ūp-ābregdan, -ābrēdan^3 _to lift up, raise up, exalt_, CP.

ūpādelfan^3 _to dig up_.

ūpādōn anv. _to take up, exhume_.

ūpāfangnes f. _reception, assumption_, A 5·464.

ūpāhæf- = ūpāhaf-

ūpāhafenlīce (æ) adv. _arrogantly_, OEG 667.

ūpāhafennes f. _exultation, presumption, arrogance, pride_, CP:
_elevation_, Æ.

ūpāhafu _lifting up_, NC 331.

ūpāhebban^6 _to lift up, raise up, exalt_, Æ, CP: _rise in the air,
fly_.

ūpāhefedlīce _arrogantly_, #HGl# 422^8.

ūp-āhefednes (Æ), -āhefennes = ūpāhefennes
  [[headword spelled “ūpāhafennes”]]

ūpāhōn^7 _to hang up_, Æ.

ūpāmȳlan? _to come to light, appear_, #HGl# 463 (v. OEG 4784).

ūpārǣran _to raise up, lift up, exalt_, AO, CP: _excite_.

ūpāreccan _to erect, raise, build_, #VPs#.

ūpārīsan^1 _to rise up_, CP.

ūpārisnes f. _resurrection_, EHy 14^6.

ūpāspringan^3 _to spring up, arise_.

ūpā-springnes, -sprungnes f. _uprising_, #LPs# 102^12.

ūpāstandan^6 _to stand up, rise up, emerge_.

ūpāstīgan^1 _to rise, ascend_, Æ, CP.

ūp-āstīgenes, -āstīgnes f. _ascent, ascension, means of going up_.

ūpāstreccan _to uplift_, CM 38.

ūpātēon^2,1 _to draw up, bring up, rear_: _draw out, pull out, pluck
up_: _lift up, place in an upright position_, Æ.

ūpāðenian _to elevate, lift up_, CP.

ūp-āweallan, -āwallan^7 _to well up, steam up, boil up_, Æ.

ūpāwegan^5 _to lift up, support_, Æ.

ūpāwendan _to turn upwards, raise_, Æ. pp. ūpāwend _supine_, #ÆGr#.

ūpberan^4 _to bear up_.

ūpbesēon^5 _to look up_.

ūpbrēdan^3 _to reproach with, upbraid_, W 248^9.

ūpcuman^4 _to come up, arise_.

ūpcund _from above, heavenly_, CP.

ūpcyme m. _rising, origin, source_.

ūpeard m. _land above, heaven_, #Gu# 1051.

ūpende m. _upper end_.

ūpengel † m. _heavenly angel_.

ūpēode pret. 3 sg. of ūpgān.

ūpfæreld n? _ascension_, ÆH 1·444^1.

ūpfeax _bald in front_, WW 276^32.

ūpfēgan _to erect_, CP.

ūpfēran _to go forth, spring forth_, GPH 401.

ūpferian _to carry up, to raise_, #Sc# 130^7.

ūp-flēogan (Æ), -flēon^2 _to fly up_.

ūpflēring f. _upper floor (of house)_, Æ.

ūpflōr fm., ūpflōre f. _upper chamber or story, garret_, Æ.

ūpflugon pret. pl. of ūpflēogan.

ūpgān anv. _to go up_: _make to go up, raise_: _rise (of sun)_, #Guth#
148^41.

ūpgang m. _rising, sunrise_, Æ: _going up, approach, ascent_: _landing,
going inland_.

ūpganga m. _landing_, #Ma# 87.

ūpgeberan^4 _to bear or carry up_.

ūpgebrēdan (W 249^3) = ūpbrēdan

ūpgemynd ‡ n. _contemplation of things above_.

ūpgēotan^2 _to well up_, #Guth# 131^199.

ūpgetēon^2,1 _to draw up_.

ūpgodu np. _the gods above, heathen gods_, WW 497^25.

ūpgong = ūpgang

ūphafenes = ūpāhafennes

ūphēafod n. _upper end_, KC 6·79^10.

ūphēah _uplifted, high, elevated_: _sublime, noble, upright_.

ūpheald n. _maintenance_, KC 4·232^5.

ūphebbe f. _water-hen, coot_, #PPs# 10 3^17.

ūphebbing f. _uprising_, LkL 8^8.

ūp-hefenes (#VPs#), -hefnes = ūpāhafennes

ūpheofon m. _heaven above, sky_.

ūphladan^6 _to draw up_, #HGl# 418.

ūphūs n. _upper room_, WW 384^3.

ūpland n. _country (as opposed to town)_.

ūplang _upright, erect_: _tall_.

ūplegen f. _hair-pin_, WW 223^16.

ūplendisc _from the uplands, rural, from beyond the town_, Æ. [ūpland]

ūplic _upper, supreme, lofty, sublime, heavenly, celestial_, Æ, CP.

ūplyft fnm. _upper air, ether, sky_.

ūpnes f. _height_, #LPs# 10 3^3.

ūpniman^4 _to raise up_, EHy 3^8.

upon = uppan

upp = ūp

uppan (o^2) prep. (w. d. and a.) _on, upon, up to, against_: (time) _on,
after_: _in addition to_. wið u. _above_. on u. _against_.

+uppan = +yppan

uppe I. adv. _above, aloft, up, inland_, CP. u. on _upon_. II. = yppe

uppe- = ūp-

uppian _to rise up, swell_, CP 277^7.

uppl- = ūpl-

uppon = uppan

ūprador = ūprodor  [[under “ūproder”]]

ūprǣcan _to reach up_, #Bl# 223^10.

ūpriht _upright, erect_, Æ: _face upwards_, OEG 2157. adv. -rihte.

ūprine = ūpryne

ūprocettan _to belch up_, #EPs# 118^171.

ūp-roder, -rodor † m. _upper heavens, ether, firmament_.

ūpryne m. _ascent, rising (of sun)_.

ūpsittan^5 ‘_residere_,’ #ÆGr#.

ūpspring m. _rising up, origin, birth_, Æ: _what springs up_.

ūpsprungennes f. _eclipse_, BH 240^20#b#.

upstīge m. _ascent, ascension_, Æ: _staircase_, GD 170^24.

ūpstīgend m. _one who mounts up, rider_, DR; CHy 4^1.

ūpðyddan _to swell up_, #Guth# 131^197.

ūpwæg = ūpweg

ūpwæstm m. _stature_, A 17·113.

ūpware mp. _inhabitants of heaven_, WW 355^29.

ūpweallan^7 _to boil up_, AO.

ūpweard, ūpweardes adv. _up, upwards_: _towards heaven_.

ūpweg † m. _ascent, ascension_.

ūpyrnan^3 (eo) _to run up, grow, increase_: _rise_.

ūpyrne = ūpryne

ūr m. _bison, aurochs_: _name of the rune for =u=_. [_Ger._ auer]

ūre I. possess. pron. _‘our,’ ours_, _AO, CP, G_. II. gp. of ic.

ūrelendisc _of our country_, #ÆGr# 93^17.

ūrigfeðere † _dewy-winged_.

ūriglāst _leaving a damp track_, #Wy# 29.

ūrne asm. of ūre I.

urnen pp., urnon pret. pl. of iernan.

ūron = ūrum dsmn. and dp. of ūre I.

ūs dap. of pers. pron. ic _us_.

ūser I. poss. pron. gen. ūsses _our_. II. gp. of ic.

ūsic, ūsig, ūsih = ūs

ūsse = ūre

ūsser = ūser

ūsses v. ūser.

ūssic = ūsic, ūs

ūsspīung f. _expectoration_, WW 113^9. [ūt, spīwung]
  [[headword spelled “spiwung”]]

ūssum dsn. of ūser.

ūt adv. ‘_out_,’ _AO, Bo, G_: _without, outside_.

ūta- (N) = ūtan-

ūtāberstan^3 _to burst out, burst forth_, CP.

ūtāblāwan^7 _to blow out, breathe out_.

ūtābrecan^4 _to break out_, Æ.

ūtābrēdan^3 _to pluck out, take out or away_.

ūtācnyssan _to drive out_, #ERPs# 35^13.

ūtacumen = ūtancumen

ūtacund _extraneous, external, foreign_, NG.

ūtacunda m. _stranger_, LkL 17^18.

ūtacymen = ūtancymen  [[under “ūtancumen”]]

ūtādelfan^3 _to dig out_, #ÆGr#.

ūtādōn anv. _to do out, put out_, Æ.

ūtādrǣfan _to drive out, expel, destroy_, Æ.

ūtādrīfan^1 _to drive out, disperse, dispel_, LL.

ūtādrȳgan _to dry out_.

ūtǣðmian (ē) _to breathe out_, MFH 122^8.

ūtāfaran^6 _to come forth, go out, depart_, CP.

ūtāflēon^2 _to flee away_.

ūtāflōwan = ūtflōwan

ūtāflȳman _to drive out or away_.

ūtāfōn^7 _to take out, except_.

ūt-āgān anv., -āgangan^7 _to go out, go forth_.

ūtāgēotan^2 _to pour out, dispense_.

ūtāhrǣcan _to spit out_.

ūtālædan _to lead out_, LL, #VPs#.

ūtāmǣr-an, -ian _to drive out, expel, depopulate_, BH.

utan = wuton

ūtan adv. _from outside_, _An_; #Chr#: _on the outside, without_, _Bo,
Gen_. ūtan landes _abroad_, _PPs_ 64^8. [‘_outen_’]

ūtanbordes adv. _from abroad_, CP 3^11.

ūtan-cumen, -cymen I. _foreign, strange_, _AO_; Æ: _belonging to
another_. [‘_outcome_’] II. m. _stranger, foreigner_.

ūtane adv. _from without, outwards, outside, externally_, AO, CP.

ūtanlandes v. ūtan.

ūtanweard _external, outside_, _WW_. [‘_outward_’]

ūtānȳdan _to drive out, expel_, #RPs# 43^3.

ūtāscēofan = ūtāscūfan

ūtāsceotan^2 _to sprout forth, burst forth_, CP: _to pierce out_, AO.

ūtāscūfan^2 _to drive out, thrust out, shut out_.

ūtāscyndan _to drive out_, Æ.

ūtāslēan^6 _to strike outwards, break out_, CP.

ūtāslīdan^1 _to slip out_.

ūtāspīwan^4 _to spew forth, vomit up_, CP 447^17,19.

ūtāstingan^3 _to put out (eyes)_.

ūtātēon^2,1 _to draw out_, Æ.

ūtātȳnan _to exclude_, #VPs#.

ūtāðringan^3 _to press out_.

ūtāðȳdan _to thrust out, cast out_, Æ.

ūtaweard (NG) = ūtanweard

ūtāweorpan^3 _to cast out, empty out_.

ūtberstan = ūtāberstan

ūtcumen = ūtancumen

ūtcwealm (a, æ) m. _utter destruction, extirpation_, Cp 461#i#.

ūtcȳðan _to promulgate, announce_, A 4·166.

ūtdrǣf f. _decree of expulsion_, ÆH 21^85.

ūtdrǣfan _to drive out, expel_.

ūtdrǣfere m. _driver out_, WW 172^46.

ūtdragan^6 to remove, LL 454[9].

ūtdrīfan^1 _to drive out or away, expel, scatter, disperse_.

ūte adv. _without, outside, abroad_, _BH_; Æ: _out_. [‘_oute_’]

ūtemest = ȳtemest

ūten = ūtan

ūtene = ūtane

ūter == ūtor

ūtera, ūterra adj. (comp.) _outer, exterior, external_, AO, CP. superl.
ȳtemest _uttermost, utmost, extreme, last_.

ūtermere m. _outer sea, open sea_, #Chr# 897#a#.

ūteweard adj. _external, outward, outside, extreme, last_. as sb.
_outward part, exterior_. on ūteweardan _on the outside, outwardly_.

ūtfær n. _going out_, Æ.

ūtfæreld n. _exodus, going out_, Æ, AO.

ūtfaran^6 _to go out_.

ūtfaru f. _going out_, _Æ, RB_. [‘_outfare_’]

ūtfēran _to go out_, Æ.

ūtflēon^2 _to flee out or away_.

ūtflōwan^7 _to flow out_, Æ, CP: _scatter, be dispersed_, EHy 5^6.

ūtflȳman = ūtāflȳman

ūtfōr f. _evacuation (from body)_, #Lcd# 6a.

ūtforlǣtan _to cast out_, Æ, AO, CP.

ūtfūs _ready to start_, B 33.

ūtgān anv. _to go out_, CP.

ūtgang m. _going out, departure, exit, exodus_: _latter part_, _Guth,
MtL, VPs_: _privy_: _dejecta, excrement_, #Lcd#: ‘_anus_.’ [‘_outgang_’]

ūtgangan^7 = ūtgān

ūtgārsecg m. _remotest sea_, #Creat# 70.

ūtgefeoht n. _external war_, BH I, #XXII#.

ūtgegān = ūtgān

ūtgelǣdan = ūtlǣdan

ūtgemǣre n. _extreme or remotest limit_.

ūtgenga m. _exit_, MtR 22^9.

ūtgēð (#KGl#) pres. 3 sg. of ūtgān.

ūtgong = ūtgang

ūthealf f. _outer side_, WW 153^45.

ūthere m. _foreign army_, #Chr#.

ūthlēap n. _fine for letting a prisoner escape_, TC.

ūtian _to put out, expel_, _LL_: _alienate (property)_. [‘_out_’]

ūtirning (io) f. _flux_, MkL 5^25.

ūtlād f. _right of passage outwards by water_, EC 344: _bringing
together (of material)_? AS 2^7.

ūtlǣdan _to lead out, bring out_, LL 54[8,1].

ūtlǣdnes (ē) f. ‘_abductio_,’ EHy 6^36.

ūtlænda = ūtlenda

ūtlændisc = ūtlendisc

ūtlǣs f. _out-pastures_, KC 6·214.

ūtlaga m. ‘_outlaw_,’ _Æ, W_.

±ūtlagian _to ‘outlaw,’ banish_, _Chr_.

ūtlagu? f. _outlawry_. [_ON._ útlagi]

ūtlah _outlawed_, #Chr#, LL.

ūtland n. _foreign land_, #PPs#: _outlying land (granted to tenants)_,
_TC_ 502. [‘_outland_’]

ūtlec = ūtlic

ūtlednes = ūtlædnes  [[headword spelled “ūtlǣdnes”]]

ūtlenda m. _foreigner, stranger, alien_, #Gl#.

ūtlende = ūtlendisc

ūtlendisc (æ) I. _strange, foreign_, _Æ, Chr_. II. m. _foreigner,
stranger_. [‘_outlandish_’]

ūtlēoran _to go out, pass_, GD.

ūtlic _from without, foreign_, BH.

ūtmǣran _to tell out, make known, proclaim, announce_, A 4·166.

ūt-mæst, -mest = ȳtemest

ūtniman^4 _to take out, redeem_.

uton = wuton

ūton = ūtan

ūtone = ūtane

ūtor (comp. of ūte) adv. _beyond_.

ūtorlic (e^2) _external_, #Kl# 14^77.

ūtrǣcan _to reach out_.

ūtrǣsan _to rush out_, #Chr#.

ūtre = ūterre f. and n. of ūterra.  [[under “ūtera”]]

ūtrīdan^1 _to ride or go away_, LL 210[8].

ūtrine = ūtryne

ūt-roccettan, -roccian _to belch out_, #EJPs#.

ūtryne m. _running away, issue, exit, outlet_: _what runs out_.

ūtsang = ūhtsang

ūtscēotan^2 _to abut on_, EC 121: _suffer to escape, aid the escape of_,
LL 194[6,1].

ūtscūfan^2 _to push out, shut out, exclude_, Æ.

ūtscyte m. _outfall, outlet, exit_, Æ.

ūtscytling m. _stranger, foreigner_, #Sc# 200^4.

ūtsendan _to send out_.

ūt-siht, -sihte f. _flux, diarrhœa_, Æ, AO.

ūtsihtādl f. _diarrhœa, dysentery_, #Lcd#.

ūtsīon^1 _to issue out_, AO 38^7.

ūtsīð m. _going out, departure_: _death_.

ūtspīwung v. ūsspīung.

utter, uttor = ūtor

uttermæst = ȳtemest

utun = wuton

ūtwǣpnedmann m. _stranger_, BH 354^25.

ūtwærc m. _dysentery_? #Lcd#.

ūtwald m. _outlying wood_, EC 289^17.

ūtwaru f. _foreign defence_, LL.

ūtweallan^7 _to well out, flow forth_, A 4·163.

ūtweard adj. _outside of, going away, striving to get out_.

ūtweardes adv. ‘_outwards_,’ _CP_.

ūtweorc = ūtwærc

ūtwīcing m. _sea-rover_, #Chr# 1098.

ūtyrnende _diuretic, purgative, diarrhœic_.

ūtyrning (io^2) f. _flux_, MkL 5^25.

ūð- intensitive prefix.

ūðe pret. sg. of unnan.

ūðgende = ūðgenge

ūðgenge _fugitive, alien, fleeting, vanishing, departing_.

ūðmǣte _huge_, MH 76^1n.

ūðon pret. pl. of unnan.

ūðuta = ūðwita

ūðweot- = ūðwit-

ūðwita (eo^2, u^2) m. _scholar, sage, philosopher, scribe, Pharisee_, Æ.

ūðwitelic = ūðwitlic

ūðwitian _to study philosophy_, #ÆGr# 146^2.

ūðwitlic _philosophical, academical_, WW.

ūðwuta (NG) = ūðwita

ūðwyt- = ūðwit-




=W=


wā I. (see also wēa) m. _‘woe,’ affliction, misery, evil_, Æ. II.
interj. (occly. governs d.) _woe! alas!_ CP. wā lā, wā lā wā, wei lā wei
_ah! oh! alas!_

wāc I. adj. _weak, soft, feeble, effeminate, cowardly, timid, pliant_,
Æ, CP: _slender, frail_: _insignificant, mean, poor_, Æ: _bad, vile_.
[_Ger._ weich] II. n. _weakness_, LL. III. pret. 3 sg. of wīcan.

wac- = wæc-

wacan^6 † _to awake, arise, be born, originate_. [v. ‘_wake_’]

waccor = wacor

wāce _weakly, slowly, negligently_.

wacel = wacol

wacen (æ^1, ea^1, a^2, o^2, u^2) f. _wakefulness_: _watching, vigil_:
_division of the night_, NG: _incentive_, DR 63^15 (a^2).

wacian (æ, e) _to be awake, keep awake, watch_, Æ, CP. [v. ‘_wake_’]

wācian _to become weak, languish_: (±) _waver, be cowardly, flinch_.
[_Ger._ weichen]

waciende _watching, vigilant_.

wāclic _weakly, mean, vile, insignificant, trifling_, Æ. adv. -līce, Æ.

wācmōd n. _faint-hearted, cowardly_, CP: _weak-minded, irresolute_, Æ.

wācmōdnes f. _weakness (of mind or body)_, _cowardice_, CP.

wācnes f. _weakness, insignificance_, Æ.

wacnian = wæcnan

wacol _awake, vigilant, watchful, attentive_, Æ. adv. -līce, Æ.

wacon = wacen

wacor _watchful, vigilant_, CP. adv. -līce, CP.

wacsan = wascan

wācscipe m. _weakness, slackness_: _insignificance, contempt_.

-wacu v. niht-w.

wacul = wacol

wād I. n. ‘_woad_,’ #ÆGr#; Mdf. II. (?) _dragnet_, OEG 61^15 (v. A
31·528).

wad- v. wæd.

wadan^6 _to go, move, stride, advance_: ‘_wade_,’ AO: (+) _traverse,
pervade_.

wadom = waðum

wādsǣd n. _woad seed_, LL 454[12].

wādspitl m. _woad-dibble_, LL 455[15].

wadung f. _travelling, going_, Æ.

wǣ (N, #VPs#) = wā

wæarhrōd = weargrōd

wæb, wæbb == webb  [[under “web”]]

wǣc- = wāc-

±wǣcan _to weaken, oppress, trouble_. [wāc]

wæccan (±) _to watch_: _wake_. [= wacian]

wæcce f. _‘watch,’ vigil, wakefulness_, Æ, CP.

wæccen = wacen

wæccende _watchful, awake_.

wæccendlīce _watchfully_, GD 242^14.

wæccer = wacor

+wǣcednes f. _weakness_, ÆH 2·552^29.

wæcen = wacen

wæcg (#Gl#) = wecg

wæcian = wacian

wæcnan, wæcnian [v. also wacan] _to awake, come forth, spring from,
arise, be born_. [‘_waken_’]

wæd † n. [usu. pl.; wad- in obl. cases] _ford, water, sea, ocean_.

wǣd f. _robe, dress, apparel, clothing, garment, covering_: _sail_, ES
40·326. [‘_weeds_’]

+wæd n. _ford, shallow_. [wadan]

wǣd- = wēd-

wǣdbrēc fp. _breeches_, Æ.

wædd = wedd

±wǣde (ē) n. = wǣd f.

wǣdelnes (ē) f. _poverty_, CP.

wæden = waden pp. of wadan.

wǣden _of woad, bluish_, OEG 7^372; 8^374. [wād]

wæder = weder

wǣderāp m. _stay, halyard_; pl. _rigging_, WW 515^15.

+wǣdian _to clothe, dress, equip, furnish_.

wǣdl (ē, ēð) f. _poverty_, CP: _barrenness_, AO.

wǣdla (ē) _poor, destitute_. as sb. = _beggar, poor man_, Æ, CP.

wǣdle = wǣdl

wǣdlēas _without clothing_.

wǣdlian _to be poor, destitute, beg_, Æ.

wǣd-lig (Æ), -ligend (GD) _poor_.

wǣdlnes = wǣdelnes

wǣdlung f. _poverty, want_, Æ: _begging_, Æ.

wǣdo = wād

wæf pret. 3 sg. of wefan.

+wæf = +wef

wǣfan _to clothe_, W 119^6.

wǣfels (ē) mn. _covering, mantle, cloak, dress, clothing, garment_, Æ.

wæfergange f. _spider_, #CPs# 89^9. [wefan]

wæfergeornnes (ǣ?) f. _eagerness for sight-seeing_, LL (wæfereorn-).

wæferhūs n. _amphitheatre_, ÆL 24^49. [wafian]

wæferlic _belonging to a theatre, theatrical_, OEG 62.

wæfernes f. _show, display, pomp, pageant_, OEG 4465.

wæfer-sēn, -sēon = wæfersȳn

wæfersolor m. ‘_pulpitum_,’ OEG 3458.

wæferstōw (ea) f. _theatre_, #Lcd#.

wæfersȳn (ē^3, ēo^3, ī^3, īe^3) f. _spectacle, sight, show, display_, Æ.
[wāfian]

wæflian _to speak foolishly_, v. NC 333.

wǣfon pret. pl. of wefan.

wæfre _unstable, unsteady, wavering, wandering, restless_: _flickering,
expiring_. [wafian]

wæfs = wæps

wæfð, wæft f. _show, spectacle_.

wæfung (#Gl#) = wafung

wæg I. m. = weg. II. pret. 3 sg. of wegan.

wǣg (ā, ē) I. m. _motion_: _wave, billow, flood, sea_. [wegan] II. (±) =
wǣge. III. = wāg. IV. = hwǣg

wægan = wegan

±wǣgan (ē) _to trouble, afflict_, CP: _deceive, falsify_, Æ: (+)
_frustrate_, #Dom# 115.

wǣgbora m. _child of the waves_? B 1440.

wǣgbord n. _ship, vessel_, #Gen# 1340.

wǣgdēor n. _sea-animal_, #Cr# 988.

wǣgdropa m. _water-drop, tear_, #Gu# 1030.

wǣge I. f. _weight, scales, balance_, Æ: _‘wey’ (of cheese, wool,
etc.)_: _‘pensum,’ burden_. II. † (ē) n. _cup, chalice_.

+wǣge n. _weight, measure_.

wægel (WW 124^2) = pægel?

wægen == wægn

wægenðīxl = wægneðīxl  [[‘wǣnes ðīxl’ under “wægn”]]

wǣgescalu = wǣgscalu

wǣgetunge f. _tongue of a balance_, WW 148^19.

wǣgfær n. _sea-voyage_, #An# 925.

wǣgfæt n. _water-vessel, clouds_, #Rd# 4^37.

wǣgfaru f. _track in the sea_, #Ex# 298.

wǣgflota † m. _(wave-floater), ship_.

wǣghengest † m. _ship_.

wǣgholm m. _sea, ocean_, B 217.

wæglǣst = weglǣst  [[variant of “weglēast”?]]

wǣglīðend † m. _sea-farer, sailor_.

wæglīðende † _seafaring_.

wægn (wægen, wǣn) m. _carriage_, _‘wain_,’ ‘_waggon,’ chariot, cart,
vehicle_. Carles wǣn; wǣnes ðīxl _the constellation of the Great Bear_.
[wegan]

-wægnan v. be-w.

wægnere (ǣn) m. _waggoner_, WW.

wǣgnere m. _enticer_, WW 436^12. [wǣgnian]

wægnest = wegnest

wægn-fær (ǣn) n., -faru f. _chariot-journey_.

wægngehrado (ǣn) _waggon-plank_, WW 267^33.

wægngerefa (ǣn) m. _‘carpenturius,’ waggon-master_? WW.

wægngewæde (ǣn) n. _waggon-cover_, A 9·264.

+wǣgnian _to deceive_: _condemn_, NC 297.

wægnscilling m. _tax on waggons_, TC 138.

wægntrēow (ǣn) n. _log given to the carter of a load of wood_, LL
453[21,4].

wægnðol (ǣn) _cart-pin_? WW 343^39.

wægnweg (ǣn) m. _cart-road_, KC.

wægnwyrhta (ǣn) m. _‘carpentarius,’ cart-wright_, WW.

wǣgon pret. pl. of wegan.

wǣgpundern n. weighing-machine.

wǣgrāp? m. _wave-rope, wave-bond (ice)_, B 1611. [or? wǣlrāp]

wǣgryft = wāgrift

wǣgscalu f. _scale of a balance_, WW 437^19. [scealu; _Ger._ wagschale]

wǣgstæð n. _sea-shore_, #Rd# 23^2.

wǣgstrēam m. _current_, #Ex# 311.

wǣgsweord ‡ n. _sword with wavy pattern_.

wǣgðel † n. _ship, vessel_.

wǣgðrēa f. _peril of the sea_, #Gen# 1490.

wǣgðrēat m. _deluge_, #Gen# 1352.

+wǣht pp. of +wǣcan and +wǣgan.

wæl I. n. [nap. walu] _slaughter, carnage_, AO. w. +slēan _to
slaughter_: _field of battle_: (in pl.) _dead bodies_, AO. [wōl; cp.
_Ger._ walstatt] II. m. = wiell. III. = wel

wǣl m. _whirlpool, eddy, pool_, Æ: _ocean, sea, river, flood_.

wæl- = wel-

wǣl- = wēal-

wæla = wela

±wǣlan _to afflict, vex, torment_, #Gu#, MtR.

wælbedd † n. _slaughter-bed_.

wælbend f. _death-bond, band of destruction_, B 1936.

wælbenn f. _deadly wound_, #Ex# 491.

wælblēat _deadly-pale_? B 2725.

wælceald _deadly cold_, #Sol# 468.

wælcēasega m. _carrion-picker (raven)_, #Ex# 164.

wælclomm m. _deadly fetter_, #Gen# 2128.

wælcræft m. _deadly power_, #Rd# 87^11.

wælcwealm m. _violent death_, #Rd# 2^8.

wæl-cyrige, -cyrie f. _(chooser of the slain), witch, sorceress_. [Ger.
Walküre]

wældēað m. _death in battle, violent death_, B 695.

wældrēor † n. _blood of battle, battle-gore_.

wælegian = weligian

wæler = weler

wælfǣhð f. _deadly feud_, B 2028.

wælfæðm m. _deadly embrace_, #Ex# 480.

wælfāg _blood-stained_, B 1128.

wælfeall = wælfill

wælfel _greedy for corpses, ghoulish_, #El# 53.

wælfeld m. _battle-field_, #Chr# 937.

wælfill m. _slaughter, death, destruction_.

wælfūs _awaiting death_, B 2420.

wælfyll = wælfill

wælfyllo f. _fill of slaughter_, B 125.

wælfȳr † n. _deadly fire_: _funeral pyre_.

wælgæst † m. _murderous stranger_.

wælgār † m. _deadly spear_.

wælgenga m. _sea-monster_? OEG 5^41; 8^305.

wælgīfre † _bloodthirsty, murderous_.

wælgimm m. _death-bringing gem_? #Rd# 21^4.

wælgrǣdig _flesh-eating, cannibal_, #An# 135.

wælgrim _fierce, violent, bloody, cruel_: _fateful, dire_. adv.
-līce, AO.

wælgrimnes f. _cruelty, torture_, GD.

wælgryre m. _deadly horror_, #Ex# 137.

wælhere ‡ m. _army intent on slaughter_.

wælhlem m. _death-stroke_, B 2969.

wælhlence † f. _coat of mail_.

wælhrēow (ēa^2) _cruel, fierce, savage, bloodthirsty_, CP. adv. -līce.

wælhrēownes f. _cruelty, ferocity, atrocity, slaughter_, Æ, CP.

wælhwelp m. _destroying hound_, #Rd# 16^23.

wælig = welig

wǣlisc = wīelisc

wæll = weall

wæll- = wæl-

wælla = willa II.

wællan (N) = willan

wælle (#VPs#) = wille

wælm == wielm

wælmist † m. _mist of death_.

wælnett n. _death-net_, #Ex# 202.

wælnīð † m. _deadly hostility, war_.

wælnot ‡ m. _fatal mark, baleful inscription_.

wælpīl m. _deadly arrow, dart_, #Gu# 1127.

wælræs † m. _deadly onslaught_.

wælræst = wælrest

wælrǣw = wælhrēow

wǣlrāp? m. _flood-fetter_, (_ice_), B 1610?

wælrēaf n. _spoil from the slain_: _act of spoiling the slain_.

wælrēc m. _deadly reek_, B 2661.

wælregn (ll) m. _deluge_, #Gen# 1350.

wælrēow = wælhrēow

wælrest (æ^2) † f. _bed of slaughter, grave_.

wælrūn f. _mystery of carnage_? _war-song_? #El# 28.

wǣlsc = wīelisc

wælsceaft m. _deadly spear_, B 398.

wælscel n? _carnage_, #Jud# 313.

wælseax n. _dagger_, B 2703.

wælsliht (ea, i, y) m. _slaughter, carnage_, #Chr#: (†) _combat_.

wælslihta m. _murderer, slayer_, GD 254^22.

wælslītende _corpse-biting_, W 187^14: _deadly-biting_, W 241^12.

wælspere n. _deadly spear_, #Ma# 322; #Lcd# 175b.

wælsteng m. _spear-shaft_, B 1638.

wælstōw f. _place of slaughter, battle-field_, AO. āgan wælstōwe geweald
_to obtain possession of the battle-field, conquer_.

wælstrǣl mf. _deadly shaft_, #Gu# 1260.

wælstrēam m. _deadly flood_, #Gen# 1301.

wælsweng m. _deadly thrust_, #Gen# 987.

wælt _part of thigh, sinew_, LL 7[68]. [weald]

wæltan (wv. in NG) = wealtan

wælwang m. _field of the slain_, #An# 1227.

wælweg (#Seaf# 63) = hwælweg

wælwulf † m. _warrior, cannibal_.

wǣlwyrt = wēalwyrt  [[headword spelled “wealwyrt”]]

wæm = (1) wamm; (2) hwamm

wæm- = wem-

wæmbede _having a great belly_, WW 161^22. [wamb]

wæmman = wemman

wǣmn (LWS) = wǣpen

wǣmnian = wǣpnian

wæmst- = wæstm-

wæn = wenn

wæn- = wen-

wǣn == wægn

wǣnan = wēnan

wǣnes = (1) wācnes; (2) wōhnes

wæng = wang

wænge = wange

wǣnunga = wēnunga

wǣpan = wēpan

wǣpen n. (nap. wǣp(e)n, wǣp(e)nu) _‘weapon,’ sword_; pl. _arms_, Æ, AO,
CP: _membrum virile_.

wǣpenbora m. _weapon-bearer, warrior, knight_, Æ.

wǣpend, wǣpened = wǣpned

wǣpen(ge)tæc n. _‘wapentake’ (subdivision of a riding)_, LL. [cp. _ON._
vāpnatak]

wǣpengeðræc n. _encounter of spears_? DR 168^3.

wǣpengewrixl(e) n. _hostile encounter_.

wǣpenhād = wǣpnedhād

wǣpenhete m. _armed hate_, #Ap# 80.

wǣpenhūs n. _armoury_, WW 348^13.

wǣpenlēas _unarmed_, Æ.

wǣpenlic _male_, WW.

wǣpenstrǣl fm. _arrow_, #PPs# 56^5.

wǣpentæc = wǣpengetæc

wǣpenðracu † f. _storm of weapons_.

wǣpenðrǣge _weapon, equipment_? #CrA# 61?

wǣpenwīfestre = wǣpnedwīfestre

wǣpenwiga m. _armed warrior_, #Rd# 15^1.

wǣpmann (Æ) = wǣpnedmann

wǣpn == wǣpen

wǣpnahūs = wǣpenhūs

wǣpned I. adj. _male_, AO. II. m. _male person_.

wǣpnedbearn n. _male child_, BH 76^8.

wǣpnedcild n. _male child_, Æ.

wǣpnedcynn n. _male species_, Æ.

wǣpnedhād m. _male sex_, Æ: _sexual power_, GD 26^30.

wǣpnedhand f. _male line_, TC 491^32.

wǣpnedhealf f. _male line_, TC 491^16.

wǣpnedmann m. _male, man_, AO.

wǣpnedwīfestre f. _hermaphrodite_, WW.

±wǣpnian _to arm_, Æ, CP.

wǣpnmann = wǣpnedmann

+wǣpnu np. _arms_, #LPs# 45^10.

wǣpnung f. _armour_, Æ: (+) _army_.

wæps m. ‘_wasp_,’ Æ. [_L._ vespa]

wær I. (napm. ware) _wary, cautious_, Æ, CP: (w. g.) _aware of_: _ready,
prepared, attentive_. II. † n. _sea, ocean_. [_ON._ verr] III. = wer.
IV. = wearr

wǣr I. adj. _true, correct_, #Gen# 681. II. f. _faith, fidelity_:
_keeping, protection_: _agreement, treaty, compact, pledge, covenant_:
_bond (of friendship)_.

+wǣr wg. _‘aware’ (of), watchful, on one’s guard_, _Chr_ 1095.

wær- = war-, wear-, wer-, wier-, wyr-

wæran = werian

wærc (wræc) m. _pain, suffering, anguish_ (A; often confused with WS.
weorc. v. JAW 52).

wærcan _to be in pain_.

wærcsār (e) n. _pain_, MkR 13^8.

wære = wer II.

wǣre I. = wǣr II. II. pret. 2 sg. of wesan.

wǣrfæst (e^2) _covenant-keeping, honourable, faithful, trusty_.

wǣrg = wērig

wærgēapnes f. _argument_, WW 192^1.

wǣr-genga, -ganga (ē^1) † wm. _one seeking protection, stranger_ (or ?=
wer-).

wǣrigian = wērgian

+wærlǣcan _to warm_, Æ.

±wærlan _to go, pass by_, DR, NG.

wærlēas _incautious, careless_.

wǣrlēas † _faithless, perfidious_.

wærlic I. _careful, wary, cautious, circumspect_, CP. adv. -līce, Æ. II.
= werlic

wǣrlīce adv. _truly_, #Gen# 652?

wærlicnes f. _wariness, caution_, HL 13^263.

wǣrloga † m. _troth-breaker, traitor, liar, devil_. [‘_warlock_’;
lēogan]

wærlot n. _craftiness, cunning, deceit_, WW 354^31.

wærna = wrenna

wærnes I. f. _wariness, caution_. II. = weargnes

wǣron pret. pl. of wesan.

wærsagol _cautious in speech_, W 72^17.

wærscipe m. _cunning, caution, prudence_, AO, CP.

wǣrstlic = wrǣstlic

wærword n. _word of warning_, WW.

wærwyrde _cautious in speech_, FT 57.

wæs pret. 1, 3 sg. of wesan.

wæsc f. _ablution, washing_, A 13·441.

+wæsc n. only in wætera +w. ‘_alluvium_,’ WW 179^35.

-wæsce v. scēap-w.

wæscen = wascen pp. of wascan.

wæscere m. _washer_.

wæscern n. _washing-place_, WW 185^2.

wæscestre I. f. _washer, house-keeper, ‘presbytera,’_ GD 276. II. m.
_dyer_, GD 191^23.

wæschūs n. _washing-place_.

wæscing m. _washing, ablution_, Ct.

wǣsend = wāsend

-wæsma v. here-w.

wæsp = wæps

wæst == west

wǣst- = wēst-

wæstling m. _sheet, blanket_, #Gl#.

wæstm (e) mn. (nap. wæst-mas, -me) _growth, increase_: _plant, produce,
offspring, fruit_, Æ, CP: _result, benefit, product_: _interest, usury_:
_abundance_: _stature, form, figure_. [weaxan]

wæstmaseten f. _planting_, Mt 5^13.

wæstmbǣre _fruitful_, Æ, CP.

+wæstmbǣrian _to be or make fruitful_, WW.

wæstmbǣrnes f. _fruitfulness, fertility_, Æ.

wæstmbǣro f. _fruitfulness_, AO 58^20.

wæstmbēorennes = wæstmbǣrnes

wæstmberende _fertile_, AO.

wæstmberendnes f. _fruitfulness, fertility_, BH 74^30#b#.

wæstme f. = wæstm

wæstmfæst _fruitful_, ANS 122^247.

wæstmian _to grow, increase, bear fruit_.

wæstmlēas _fruitless, unfruitful_, Æ.

wæstmlic _fruitful_, DR 18^13.

wæstmsceatt m. _interest, usury_.

wæsðm = wæstm

wǣt (ā, ē) I. adj. _‘wet,’ moist_, AO. II. n. _liquid, drink_, Æ. ǣt
and w. _food and drink_, Æ.

wǣta m. _wetness, moisture, humours, fluid, water_, Æ, CP: _drink_, Æ.

±wǣtan _to wet, moisten, water_, #ÆGr#.

wǣte f. = wǣta m.

wæter (e) n. (gs. wætres, wæteres) ‘_water_,’ Æ, CP; Mdf: _sea_.

wæterādl f. _dropsy_, #Lcd#.

wæter-ǣdre, -æddre f. _spring of water, source_, Æ.

wæterælfādl f. _a disease_, #Lcd#.

wæterælfen f. _water-elf_, WW 457^8.

wæter-berend (OEG 871), -berere (WW) m. _water-bearer, sutler,
camp-follower_.

wæterbōh m. _succulent shoot, sprig_, WW 149^25.

wæterbolla m. _dropsy_, #Lcd#.

wæterbora m. _water-bearer_.

wæterbrōga † m. _frightful flood_.

wæterbūc m. _water-vessel, water-pot, pitcher_, Æ.

wæterbucca m. _water-spider_, WW 122^4.

wæterburne f. _water-stream_, DD 3.

wæterbyden f. _bucket, cask_, WW 503^14.

wæterclāð m. _towel_, RB 59^7.

wætercrōg m. _water-pot_, WW 484^28.

wætercrūce f. _water-pot_, Cp 283#u#.

wæterdrinc m. _a drink of water_, NC 331.

wæter-egsa, -egesa † m. _water-terror_.

wæterelfen = wæterælfen

wæterfæsten n. _water-fastness, place protected by water_, #Chr# 894#a#.

wæter-fæt n., nap. -fatu _water-pot, flagon_, Æ.

wæterflaxe f. _water-pitcher_, _Mk_ 14^13. [v. ‘_flask_’]

wæterflōd m. _water-flood, inundation, deluge_, Æ, AO.

wæterfrocga m. _water frog_, NC 331.

wæterful _dropsical_, WW.

wæterfyrhtnes f. _hydrophobia_, WW 112^24.

wætergāt f. _water spider_, WW 122^4.

wætergeblǣd n. _watery pustule_? #Lcd# 162b.

wætergefeall n. _waterfall_, CC 116.

wætergelād n. _conduit_, WW 339^4.

wætergelæt n. _aqueduct_, WW 211^13.

wætergesceaft f. _nature of water_, GD 220^17.

wætergewæsc n. ‘_alluvium_,’ WW 187^1.

wætergrund m. _sea-bottom, depth_, #PPs# 106^23.

wætergyte m. _‘Aquarius’ (sign of the Zodiac)_, #Lcd# 3·246^4.

wæterhæfern m. _crab_, #Lcd# 16b.

wæterhālgung f. _consecration of water_, DR 117^1.

wæterhelm m. _covering of ice_, #GnE# 74?

±wæterian _to water, moisten, irrigate_, Æ, CP: _lead (cattle) to
water_, Æ.

wæterig _watery, watered_, Æ.

wæterisc (e) _watery, moist_.

wæterlēas _waterless_, Æ.

wæterlēast f. _want of water_, HL 9·177.

wæterlic _aquatic_, GPH 394.

wætermēle (ǣ^3) m. _bowl, basin_, #ÆGr#.

wæternǣdre f. _water-snake_, WW.

wæterordāl n. _water-ordeal_, LL 388[2].

wæterpund n. ‘_norma, libella aquatica_,’ WW 150^37.

wæterpytt m. _water-pit, well_, Æ.

wæterrīðe? f. _conduit_ (v. OEG 1714n).

wæterscēat m. _napkin, towel_, WW 127^3.

wæter-scipe (Æ, CP), -scype m. _sheet of water, waters_: _conduit_.

wæterscȳte f. _towel, napkin_, Æ.

wætersēað m. _water-pit, cistern_.

wætersēoc _dropsical_, Æ.

wætersēocnes f. _dropsy_, Æ.

wæterspryng m. _water-spring_, #Da# 386.

wætersteall m. _standing water, pond_.

wæterstefn f. _voice of waters_, #PPs# 92^4.

wæterstoppa m. _bucket_, GD 11^22.

wæterstrēam m. _river_.

wætertīge m. _canal, aqueduct_, #HGl# 418^50.

wæterðēote f. _conduit, flood-gate, torrent, cataract_, Æ.

wæter-ðīsa, -ðissa m. _(water-traverser) whale_, #Whale# 50: _ship_,
#Gu# 1303.

wæterðrūh f. _water-pipe, conduit_, #Gl#.

wæterðrȳð f. _rush of waters_, #PPs# 106^22.

wæterung f. _watering, providing with water_, Æ.

wæterwǣdlnes f. _dearth of water_, ÆL 23b^538.

wæterweg m. _watercourse_.

wæterwrīte f. _‘clepsydra,’ water-clock_, WW 378^39.

wæterwyll m. _spring of water, fountain_, LL 312[5,1].

wæterwyrt f. _water star-wort_.

wæterȳð f. _billow_, B 2242.

wǣtian _to be wet_, WW 447^1.

wætig (GPH 389) = pætig  [[headword spelled “pǣtig”]]

wætla m. _swathe, bandage_, #Lcd# 78a.

wǣtnes f. _moisture_, LkL 8^6 (ē).

wætrian = wæterian

wætter (N) = wæter

wǣtung f. _wetting, moisture_, #Lcd#.

wæð n. _ford_, #Chr# 1073#d#. [_ON._ vað]

-wǣða v. here-w.

wǣðan _to wander, roam about_: _hunt_. [wāð]

wǣðeburne f. _fishing stream_? BC (Mdf).

wǣðelnes = wǣdelnes

wǣðl = wǣdl

wǣwærðlic _good_? A 8·335^30. adv. (e, y) -līce _successfully_? A 8·298;
W 169^1.

wæx (N) == weax

wǣx = wēox pret. 3 sg. of weaxan.

wæxð pres. 3 sg. of wascan.

wafian _to ‘wave,’_ Æ.

wāfian _to be agitated, astonished, amazed, gaze at, wonder at, admire_,
Æ: _hesitate_.

wāfiende ‘_theatralis_,’ ‘_visibilis_,’ OEG 233.

waforlic = wæferlic

wafung (æ, e) f. _spectacle, display, pageantry, sight_, Æ:
_astonishment, amazement_, Æ. [wafian]

wafungstede m. _place for shows, theatre_, WW.

wafungstōw f. _place for shows, theatre_, #Lcd# 3·206^16.

wāg I. (ǣ) m. _wall_, Æ, AO, CP. [_Goth._ waddjus] II. = wǣg I.

wāghrægel n. _tapestry, vail_, NG.

wagian _to move, shake, swing, totter_, Æ. [‘_wag_’; wegan]

wagn = wægn

wāgon = wǣgon pret. pl. of wegan.

wāgrift (e, y) n. _wall-hanging, tapestry, vail, curtain_.

wāgðeorl _doorway_? #LPs# 61^4. [ðyrel]

wāgðyling (wāh-) f. _wainscoting_, WW 147^31. [wāg, ðille]

wagung f. _moving, shaking_, #Lcd#.

wāh == wāg

wāhmelu n. _fine meal_, #Lcd# 101b. [_OHG._ wāhi]

wahsan = wascan

wal = wæl I.

wal- = wæl-, weal-

wala (N) = wela I.

wālā! wālāwā! interj. (w. g.) _oh! alas! wo!_ [‘_wellaway_’; wā]

walan v. walu I.

Wālas = Wēalas

walc- = wealc-

wal-crigge, -cyrge = wælcyrige

walcspinl (o^1) f. _curling-iron, crisping-pin_, WW 198^1; OEG 26^70.

wald (N, #VPs#) == weald

walde (CP 443^11) = wolde

waldmora = wēalmora

Wāle (= ēa) f. _Welshwoman, female slave_, #Rd#.

waler (DR) = weler

walh == wealh

wālic _woful, lamentable_, #Sat# 100.

wall (#VPs#) == weall

wallað (ÐR) = pres. pl. of wællan = willan

walm (N) = wielm

walu I. f. _ridge, bank_, Ct: _rib, comb (of helmet)_, B 1031. II. f? m?
_weal, mark of a blow_, OEG. III. v. wæl I.

wālwyrt = wēalwyrt  [[headword spelled “wealwyrt”]]

wam = wamm

wamb (o) f. _belly, stomach_, Æ, CP, #VPs#: ‘_womb_’: _hollow_? KC 3·52.

wambādl f. _stomach-ache_, #Lcd# 81a.

wambhord n. _contents of the belly_, #Rd# 18^10.

wambscyldig? _gluttonous_? v. NC 331.

wambsēoc _having pain in the stomach_, #Lcd#.

wamcwide (o) † _shameful speech, curse, blasphemy_.

wamdǣd (o) † f. _deed of shame, crime_.

wamfreht (o) n. _sinful divination_, WW.

wamful † _impure, shameful, sinful, bad_.

wamlust m. _allurement, enticement_, A 13·28; OEG 7^37.

wamm (o) I. mn. _stain, spot, disgrace, defect, defilement, sin, evil,
crime_: _injury, loss, hurt, misfortune_. II. adj. _shameful, bad_.

wamsceaða (o) † m. _sin-stained, foe, devil_.

wamscyldig _sinful, criminal_, #Gen# 949 (o).

wamwlite (o) m. _wound in the face_, LL.

wamwyrcende (o) _worker of sin_, #Cr# 1093.

wan I. (once +; o) (usu. indecl. and used predicatively) _wanting,
deficient, lacking, absent_, CP. ānes wan ðe ðritig _or_ ānes wana
ðrittigum _twenty-nine_. II. pret. 3 sg. of winnan. III. = wann

±wana m. _lack, want, deficiency_, Æ. w. bēon _to lack, fail_.

wanǣht (o) f. _want, poverty_, †Hy 4^102.

wananbēam m. _spindle-tree_, #Gl#.

wancol (e) _unstable, unsteady, tottering, vacillating, weak_. #Bo#.

wand I. pret. 3 sg. of windan. II. f? _mole (animal)_, #Gl#.

+wand n. _shamefastness_, RB 68^8: _hesitation, scruple_. [windan]

wandeweorpe f. _mole (animal)_, Æ(u^3).

wandian (o) _to hesitate, flinch, desist from, omit, neglect_, Æ, CP:
_fear, stand in awe_, Æ: _have regard to, care for_. [windan]

wandlung f. _changeableness_, #Bo# 15^27.

-wandodlīce v. unfor-w.

wandrian _to ‘wander,’ roam, fly round, hover_, CP: _change_: _stray,
err_.

wandung f. _feeling of respect_, NC 332.

wand-wurp, -wyrp = wandeweorpe

wanfāh (o) _dark-hued_, #Rd# 53^6.

wanfeax (o) _dark haired_, #Rd# 13^8.

wanfōta m. _pelican_, WW 287^10.

wanfȳr (o) n. _lurid flame_, #Cr# 966.

wang I. (o) n. _plain, mead, field, place_: _world_. II. m. = wange

wangbeard m. _whisker_, #Lcd# 73a.

wange (e, o) n. _jaw, cheek_. [_Ger._ wange]

wangere m. _pillow, bolster_.

wangstede m. _place, locality_.

wangtōð m. _molar, grinder_.

wangturf f. _meadow-turf_, #Lcd# 1·400^7.

wanhæf- = wanhaf-

+wanhǣlan _to weaken_, Æ.

wanhǣlð f. _weakness, sickness_, #Sc# 54^19.

wanhǣw (o) _bluish_, WW 376^23.

wanhafa m. _poor man_, #SPs# 85^1.

wanhafol _needy_, Æ.

wan-hafolnes, -haf(e)nes (æ) f. _want, hunger_.

wanhāl _unsound, weak, ill, sick, maimed_, Æ, CP.

+wanhālian _to make weak_, HL 12^51.

wanhālnes f. _weakness, ill-health_.

wanhlȳte _having no share in, free from_, WW 398^33

wanhoga m. _thoughtless one, fool_.

wan-hygd, -hȳd † f. _carelessness, recklessness, daring_.

wanhygdig (hȳdig) † _careless, rash_.

±wanian _to diminish_ (tr.), _lessen, curtail, injure, impair, take
from_, Æ, AO: _infringe, annul_: _diminish_ (intr.), _dwindle, decline,
fade, decay_, Æ, CP: _‘wane’ (moon)_.

wānian _to complain, bewail, lament, bemoan_, AO. [_Ger._ weinen]

wan-iendlic, -gendlic _diminutive_, #ÆGr#.

wann I. (o) _dark, dusky, lurid_. [‘_wan_’] II. pret. 3 sg. of winnan.

wannhāl = wanhāl

wannian _to become dark-coloured, turn black_, NC 332: _become
discoloured_? ÆP 178^11.

wanniht _wan, pale, livid_, WW 431^21.

wansǣlig † _unhappy_.

wansceaft † f. _misery, misfortune_.

wansceaf-ta m. (or -te f.) _a disease_, #Lcd#.

wanscrȳd _poorly clad_, ÆH 500^17.

wansēoc ‘_commitialis_’? v. OEG 4937.

wansian _to diminish_, #Chr# 656#e#.

wanspēd f. _poverty, want_, AO.

wanspēdig _poor, indigent_, Æ.

wanung (o) f. _waning, decrease, deprivation, diminution, loss, injury,
weakening_, Æ.

wānung f. _howling, lamentation_, Æ.

wanwegende _waning (moon)_, #Lcd#.

wāpe _napkin, towel_? IM 122^23.

wapelian, wapolian _to bubble, froth, exhale, emit, pour forth_.

wapul m? _bubble, froth_, WW.

war = wearr

wār I. n. _sea-weed_, #Gl#: _sand_. II. = wǣr

wara, gs. of waru.

-waran v. burg-, ceaster-, eorð-w.

waras (N) = weras nap. of wer I.

-waras v. burg-, eorð-w.  [[under “eorðwaran”]]

warað = waroð

ward = (1) weard; (2) wearð (weorðan)

-ware v. burg-, eorð-, ceaster-w.  [[under “ceasterwaran”]]

waren- = warn-

warht = worht

warian _to beware_: (±) _guard, protect, defend_: _warn_, CP: (†) _hold,
possess, attend_: (†) _inhabit_. [wær]

wārig _weedy, dirty_, #GnE# 99.

wāriht _full of sea-weed_, #Gl#.

waritrēo = weargtrēow

warnian (ea, are) (±) _to ‘warn,’ caution_, Æ: (±) _take warning, take
heed, guard oneself against_, Æ, CP: _deny (oneself, etc.)_. [wearn]

warnung (ea) f. ‘_warning_’: _foresight, caution_. [_Ger._ warnung]

waroð (a^1, ea^1, e^1, a^2, e^2, u^2) n. _shore, strand, beach_.

wāroð n. _alga, sea-weed_, #Rd# 41^49.

waroðfaruð m. _surf_, #An# 197.

waroðgewinn (u^2) n. surf, #An# 439.

warp = wearp I.

warr = wearr

warscipe = wærscipe

warð I. (N) = waroð. II. (N) = wearð pret. 3 sg. of weorðan.

waru I. f. _‘ware,’ article of merchandise_, Æ. II. f. _shelter,
protection, care, custody, guard, defence, vindication_, Æ, AO.

-waru v. burg-, ciric-, eorð-w.  [[under “eorðwaran”]]

waruð = waroð

wāruð = wāroð

was = wæs

-wāsa v. wudu-w.

wascan^6 (æ; acs, a(c)x) _to ‘wash,’ bathe, lave_: _envelop_, B 3115
(or ?= weaxan).

wase (v. OEG 1818) f. _mire, marsh_.

  [[Entry in first edition:
  wāse f. _ooze, mud, dirt, filth, mire, marsh, moor, water meadow,
  foreshore_. [_Ger._ wiese] ]]

wāsend (ǣ) m. _‘weasand,’ windpipe, gullet_.

wasescite f. _cuttlefish_, WW 181^7. [wase, scēotan]

wāst pres. 2 sg. of witan.

wāt I. pres. 3 sg. of witan. II. pret. 3 sg. of wītan. III. = wǣt

watel (o^2, u^2) m. _‘wattle,’ hurdle, covering_: (pl.) _thatching_.

water = wæter

watol = watel

watr- = wætr-, wæter-

watul = watel

wāð † f. _wandering, journey_: _pursuit, hunt, hunting, chase_.

waðema = waðuma  [[under “waðum”]]

wāðol _wandering_? or m. _full moon_? #Fin# 8?

wað-um, -uma † m. _wave, flood, stream, sea_.

wāwa = wēa

wāwan^7 _to blow (of wind)_, #Rd# 41^81.

waxan = (1) wascan; (2) weaxan

waxgeorn = weaxgeorn

we (ē) pron. (1st pers. plur.) g. ūser, d. ūs, acc. ūs(ic) ‘_we_.’

wēa m. _misfortune, evil, harm, trouble_: _grief, woe, misery_: _sin,
wickedness_.

weacen = wæcen

wēacwānian _to lament_, #Sat# 320.

wēadǣd † f. _evil deed_.

wēadhōc (Ep 887) = wēodhōc

weadu (K) = wudu

wēafod = wēofod

weag = weg

wēagesīð m. _companion in trouble_.

weagian = wagian

weahte pret. 3 sg. of weccan.

weahxan = weaxan

weal = (1) weall; (2) wæl

wēal == wealh

weal- = weall-, wel-

wēalāf † f. _wretched remnant_.

wēaland = wēalland

Wēalas (pl. of wealh) _the Welsh_: _Wales_. West Wē(a)las _West-Welsh,
Cornish_.

+wealc n. _rolling, tossing motion_: _attack_, #Chr# 1100.

wealca (a) m. †_billow, rolling wave_: _light floating garment_.

wealcan^7 (±) _to move round, revolve, roll, toss_, CP: _fluctuate_:
_revolve in one’s mind, discuss, scheme, reflect_, Æ, CP: _wrap round,
twist, curl_; OEG: (+) _traverse_. [‘_walk_’]

wealcere m. _fuller_, WW 407^29.

±wealcian (a) _to curl, roll up_, OEG.

wealcol _mobile, not firmly fixed_, GPH 399^441.

wealcspinl (a, o) f. _crisping-pin_, OEG, WW.

Wēalcynn n. _the Welsh kin_, EC 146^24.

weald I. (a) m. _weald, forest, wood, grove_, AO: _bushes, foliage_,
#Gen# 846. [‘_wold_’] II. m. _power_, AO (usu. +). III. _powerful_, RB
117^5. IV. conj. _perhaps, possibly, haply, lest_, Æ.

+weald n. _might, power_: _control, command, dominion_. his gewealdes
_of his own accord, intentionally_: _protection_: _subjection_: _groin_:
_muscles of the neck_? LL 88[77].

±wealdan^7 (a) w. g. d. (instr.) and a. _to rule, control, determine,
direct, command, govern, possess_, AO, CP: _wield (a weapon)_,
_exercise_: _cause, bring about_, CP.

wealdbǣre n. _place affording mast for swine_, EC 60^23.

+wealden I. adj. _subject (to)_, _easily controlled_: _inconsiderable,
small_. II. adv. _moderately_.

wealdend (a) I. m. _leader, controller, ruler, lord, king (often of
God)_. II. f. _female ruler_.

±wealdende _ruling, powerful_.

Wealdendfæder m. _Heavenly Father_.

+wealdendlīce _powerfully_, #PPs# 135^16.

wealdendras late nap. of wealdend.

+wealdenmōd _self-controlled_, #Cra# 70.

wealdes (usu. +) _of one’s own accord_, CP 198^22.

wealdgenga m. _robber, thief_, Æ.

±wealdleðer n. _rein, bridle_, Æ.

wealdmoru = wēalmoru  [[redirected to “wealhmoru”]]

wealdnes (a) f. _rule_, #VPs# 144^13.

wealdswaðu f. _forest-track_, B 1403 (a^1).

wealdung f. _government, rule_.

weale = wale  [[form of “walu”?]]

wēales v. wealh.

wealfæsten = weallfæsten

wealg _nauseous_, CP 447^18.

wealgat = weallgeat

wealh (a) m. (gs. wēales) _foreigner, stranger, slave_: _Briton,
Welshman_.

wealhāt _boiling hot, red-hot_, #Lcd# 96a.

wealhbaso f. _foreign red, vermilion_, #Gl#.

Wealhcynn n. _men of Wales, Britons_.

wealhen = wīelen

wealhfæreld (a) n. _a force which patrolled the Welsh border_? KC
2·60^27.

wealh-gefēra, -gerēfa m. _commander of the_ ‘wealhfæreld,’ #Chr# 897#a#.

wealhhāfoc m. _foreign hawk, falcon_.

wealhhnutu (a) f. (_foreign nut_), ‘_walnut_,’ WW 452^34.

wealhisc = wīelisc

wealh-moru, -more (a^1) f., -mora m. _carrot, parsnip_.

wealhstōd m. _interpreter, translator_, Æ, CP: _mediator_, CP.

Wealhðēod f. _Welsh nation_, LL.

wealhwyrt = wēalwyrt  [[headword spelled “wealwyrt”]]

wealian _to be defiant_? ÆL 12^48.

wēalic _woeful, sorrowful_, #Wy# 12.

weall I. (a, æ) m. _‘wall,’ dike, earthwork, rampart, dam_, Æ, AO, CP;
Mdf: (†) _rocky shore, cliff_. [_L._ vallum] II. = wæl. III. = wiell

weallan^7 (±) _to be agitated, rage, toss, well, bubble, seethe, foam,
be hot, boil_, Æ, AO, CP: _swarm_: _flow_, Æ. ūp w. _to rise (of a
river)_, AO. [_Ger._ wallen]

wēalland n. _foreign country_, #Gen# 2706 (weal-): _Normandy_, #Chr#
1040#e#. [wealh]

Wēallas = Wēalas

weallclif n. _sea-cliff_, B 3132.

wealldīc f. _a walled ditch_? KC 5·346^19.

wealldor n. _door in a wall_, #Cr# 328.

wealle f. _star-wort_.

+wealled = +weallod

weallende _boiling, fervid, ardent, energetic, fiery_.

weallfæsten n. _walled place, rampart, fortification, fortress_.

weallgeat † n. _rampart-gate, postern_.

weallgebrec n. _wall-breaking, act of making a breach_, AO 134^30.

weallgeweorc n. _building of a wall_, Æ _destruction of walls_, #ÆGr#
12^5.

weallian _to go abroad, travel, wander_: _go as pilgrim_.

weallīm m. _cement, mortar_, Æ (#Gen# 11^3).

wēallisc = wīelisc

+weallod _walled_, Æ.

weallstān † m. _stone used in building_.

weallsteall m. _wall-place, foundation_? #Wa# 88.

weallstēap † _steep as a wall_, #Gen#.

weallstilling (y^2) m. _repair of walls_.

weallstōw = wælstōw

weallðrǣd (a^1) m. _plumb-line_, WW 522^27.

weallung (a, y) f. _agitation, fervour, zeal_.

weallwala † m. _part of a house-wall_? _foundation_? #Ruin# 21.

weallweg (a^1) m. _walled road_? Ct.

weallwyrhta m. _mason_, #Gl#.

weallwyrt = wealwyrt

wēal-mora, -more = wealhmoru

wealnes (#CPs#) = wealdnes

wealowian = wealwian

wealsāda m. _cord (for binding slaves)_? #PPs# 139^5. [wealh]

wealstilling (y^2) = weallstilling

wealstōd = wealhstōd

wealt I. _shaky, unsteady_. II. = wielt pres. 3 sg. of wealdan.

wealtan ? _to turn about, roll, reel, stagger_.  [[from first edition]]

wealweorc n. _masonry_, Æ.

wealwian (a, y) _to roll_ (intr.), ‘_wallow_,’ CP: _roll_ (tr.): _dry
up, shrivel, wither, decay_.

wealwyrt (a, æ) f. _dwarf elder, endive_. [wealh]

wēamēt, wēamētto f. _passion, anger_, Æ.

wēamōd _ill-humoured, angry_, CP.

wēamōdnes f. _anger, passion, impatience_, Æ, CP.

weaps = wæps

wear = (1) wearr; (2) hwer

wear- = wær-

wearas = weras npl. of wer.

wearc = wærc

weard I. fm. _watching_, _‘ward,’ protection, guardianship_, AO, CP:
_advance post_, AO: _waiting for, lurking, ambuscade_. II. m. _keeper,
watchman, guard, guardian, protector_, AO: (†) _lord, king_: (†)
_possessor_. III. adv. _towards, to_. wið...weard _towards_. IV. =
wearð. V. ‘_sandix_,’ v. A 30·249.

weardian _to watch, guard, keep, protect, preserve_: _hold, possess,
occupy, inhabit_. lāst w. _keep the track of, follow closely_. swaðe w.
_remain behind_. leger w. _keep one’s bed_.

weardmann m. _watchman, guard, patrol_, Æ.

weardseld, weardsetl (Æ) n. _guardhouse, watch-tower_.

weardsteall m. _watch-tower_, WW.

weardwīte n. _penalty for not keeping guard_, TC 411^31.

wearf I. (EC 202) = wearp pret. 3 sg. of weorpan. II. = hwearf

wearg (e) I. m. _(wolf), accursed one, outlaw, felon, criminal_, Æ. II.
(-erig, -yrig) adj. _wicked, cursed, wretched_. [_ON._ vargr]

weargberende _villainous_, WW 407^27.

weargbrǣde (-geb-) f. a _warty eruption, impetigo, stye in the eye,
tetter, ringworm, mole, freckle_. [wearr]

weargnes (æ, e, y) f. _evil, malice, cunning_.

weargrōd f. _scaffold, gallows_, #Gl#.

weargtreafu (rht) np. _home of the damned, hell_, #El# 927.

weargtrēow (ari-) n. _gallows_, Ct.

weargung (e) f. _misery_, #EPs# 87^19.

wearh I. == wearg. II. = wearr

wēariht = wearriht  [[under “wearrig”]]

wearm ‘_warm_,’ Æ, CP. adv. -e.

wearmelle = wurmille

±wearmian (eo, y) _to become warm_, Æ, CP.

wearmlic _warm_, #Da# 350.

wearmnes f. _warmth_, ÆL 11^160.

wearn I. f. _reluctance, repugnance, refusal, denial_, CP: _resistance_:
_reproaches, abuse_. [waru] II. = worn

wearn- = warn-, wearrn-

wearnmǣlum (ē) adv. _in troops_, WW 25^1. [worn]

wearnwīslīce av. _obstinately_, WW.

wearod, wearoð = waroð

wearp I. (a) m. _‘warp,’ threads stretched lengthwise in a loom_: _twig,
osier_. [weorpan] II. pret. 3 sg. of weorpan.

wearpfæt n. _basket_, WW.

wearr (a, æ, eo) m. _wart, callosity_, Æ.

wearrig (Æ), wearriht _warty, knotty_.

wearrihtnes f. _knottiness, roughness (of skin)_, #Gl#.

wearrnes (wearn-) f. _knottiness_.

weart, wearte (a, e) f. ‘_wart_.’

weartere (æ) m. _occupier, dweller_, #Chr# 565. [weard]

wearð I. n. = weorð. II. pret. 3 sg. of weorðan. III. = waroð

wearð- = weorð-

wēas adv. _by chance, accidentally_, CP. mid w. _by chance_.

weasc- = wæsc-

wēasgelimp n. _a chance occurrence_, WW 410^10.

wēaspell n. _evil tidings_, B 1315.

weastern (#Chr# 1015) = western  [[form of “westerne”?]]

weastm = wæstm

wēatācen † n. _sign of grief_.

wēaðearf f. _woful need_, #Wif# 10.

weax (e) n. ‘_wax_,’ AO.

weaxæppel m. _ball of wax_.

±weaxan (e) I. sv^7 _to ‘wax,’ grow, be fruitful, increase, become
powerful_, Æ, AO, CP. II. = wascan

weaxberende m. _candle-bearer, acolyte_, DR 195^8 (io^2).

weaxbred (e) n. _writing-tablet_, Æ: _diagram, list_, A 8·332.

weaxcandel (e^1, o^2) f. _wax candle_.

weaxen pp. of weaxan.

weaxgeorn (a) _desirous of increase, very greedy_, WW 102^13.

weaxgesceot n. _payment made in wax_, W 171^1.

weaxhlāf m. _wax tablet_, #Lcd#.

weaxhlāfsealf f. _wax salve_, #Lcd# 92b.

±weaxnes f. _increase, growth_.

weaxscot = weaxgesceot

weaxsealf (e) f. _wax salve_.

weaxung f. _growth, increase_.

web, webb n. _‘web,’ weft_: _woven work, tapestry_, Æ. [wefan]

webba m. _weaver_, EC, WW.

webbēam m. _weaver’s beam_, WW.

webbestre f. _female weaver_, WW 188^11.

webbgeweorc n. _weaving_, HL, MH.

webbian _to weave, contrive_.

webbung (hw) f. _plotting, conspiracy_, OEG 2975: ‘_scena_’ (= wāfung?
v. OEG 2920).

webgerēðru np. _weaver’s implement_? WW 294^16.

webgerod n. _weaver’s implement_, Cp 1988.

webhōc m. _weaver’s comb, reed_? WW.

weblic _pertaining to a weaver_, #Gl#.

websceaft m. _weaver’s beam_, WW 293^39.

webtǣg (æ) f. _weaving-thread_, OET 615. [tēag]

webtāwa m. _thread, line_, WW 433^8.

wēbung (Cp 180#s#) = wāfung  [[headword spelled “wafung”]]

webwyrhta m. _fuller_.

wecca = weoca  [[form of “weoce”?]]

weccan (±) _to awaken, arouse_, CP: _call up, bring forth, produce_:
_recall_: _exhort, encourage_: _move, set in motion_: _kindle_. [wacan]

weccend m. _instigator_, GPH 393.

wēce = wāc I.

wecedrenc m. _emetic_, #Lcd#.

wecg m. ‘_wedge_’: _mass of metal, lump_, Æ: _piece of money_, Æ.

wecgan _to move, agitate, drive hither and thither_: _be moved_.

wecian (#VPs#) = wacian

wecnian = wæcnian  [[under “wæcnan”]]

wed = wedd

wēd == wǣd

+wēd I. n. _fury, rage, madness_. [wōd] II. ‘_obliquus, distortus_,’ ZDA
31·9^168. [wōh]

±wēdan (ǣ) _to be mad, rage_, Æ, AO, CP. [wōd]

wēd-beorge, -berge = wēdeberge

wedbrice = wedbryce

wedbrōðor m. _pledged brother (in a brotherhood of compact, not of
blood)_, #Chr#. [wedd]

wedbryce m. _breach of agreement, treachery_.

wedd n. _pledge, agreement, covenant, security_, Æ, AO, CP: _dowry_, WW.

±weddian _engage, pledge oneself, covenant, promise, vow_: _give to
wife, betroth_: _‘wed,’ marry_.

weddung f. _pledging, betrothal_, #Nic# 474^33.

wēde I. _raging, mad_. [wōd] II. (A) = wǣde

+wēde n. _fury, rage, madness_, Æ. [wōd]

wēdeberge f. _hellebore_.

wēdehund m. _mad dog_, #Lcd, Met#.

wēdelnes (#VPs#) = wēðelnes

wēden (MF 178) = wǣden

wēdendsēoc _mad_, GD 135n; 223.

wēdenheort I. _mad, insane_, WW. II. n. _madness_.

wēdenheortnes f. _madness, frenzy_, CP.

weder I. n. _‘weather,’ air_, AO: _sky, firmament_: _breeze, storm,
tempest_. II. = weðer

+weder = +wider

wederblāc _bleached by the weather_, A 8·449.

wederburg f. _exposed town_, #An# 1699.

wedercandel f. _sun_, #Ph# 187.

wederdæg m. _day of fine weather_, #Az# 96.

wederfest _weather-bound_, #Chr# 1046#e#.

wederian _to exhibit a change of weather_.

wedertācen n. _sun_, #Gu# 1267.

+wederu np. _weather_. [_OHG._ giwitiri]

wederung (æ) f. _(bad) weather_, #Chr# 1085.

wederwolcen n. _cloud_, #Ex# 75.

wedewe = wuduwe

+wedfæstan (wet-) _to betroth_, Cp 635#s#.

wēding f. _madness_, GD 164^27; WW 409^38.

wēdl- = wǣdl-

wedlāc n. _pledge, plighted troth, ‘wedlock’_.

wedloga m. _violator of agreement, traitor_. [lēogan]

+wef n. _woof, web_.

wēf- = wāf-, wǣf-, wēof-

wefan^5 (eo) (±) _to ‘weave,’_ Æ: _devise, contrive, arrange_.

wefl I. f. _woof, warp_, #Gl#: _an implement for weaving_. II. = wifel

weft, wefta m. _weft_, WW.

weg I. (æ) m. _‘way,’ direction_, Æ, AO: _path, road, highway_, Mdf:
_journey_, Æ: _course of action_. ealne w. (ealneg) adv. _always_. on w.
(aweg) adv. _away_. be...wege _on the way (to)_ [_Ger._ weg] II. =
wæg II.

wēg = (1) wǣge; (2) wīg

weg- = onweg-

wēg- = wǣg-

wegan^5 (±) _to carry, support, sustain, bear, bring_, CP: _move_:
_wear_: (±) _‘weigh,’ measure_.

+wegan _to fight_, B 2400.

weg-brāde, -brǣde (Æ) f. _way-bread, plantain, dock_.

wegfarende (ǣ, ē) _wayfaring_, Æ.

wegfērend m. _wayfarer, traveller_, GD.

wegfōr f. _travel, journey_, WW 423^33.

wegg = wecg

weggedāl n. _road-dividing, cross-way_, #Gl#.

weggelǣte fn. _junction of roads_, #Gl#, Ct.

weggē-sīð? -sīða? (v. OEG 861) _travelling companion_.

weggewit n. _aberration (of mind)_, #CPs# 115^11.

weg-lā interj. ‘_euge_’! #PPs# 69^4.

weglēas _out of the way, erroneous_: _without a road_.

weglēast (ī^2) f. _trackless place, wilderness_, #ARSPs# 106^40.

wegnest n. _food for a journey, viaticum_.

wegrēaf n. _highway robbery_, LL.

wegtwiflung f. _branching of roads_, WW 179^16. [= -twislung]

wēgur = wīgār

wehsan = weaxan

wehte pret. 3 sg. of weccan.

wei v. wā.

weig = weg

wel I. adv. (comp. bet) _‘well,’ abundantly, very, very easily, very
much_: _fully_: _nearly_: pleonastic (as in ēac w. = also), sometimes =
_indeed, to be sure_. tō w. _too well_. w. nēah _nearly, almost_. w.
hwǣr, w. genwǣr _for the most part, nearly everywhere_. wella _alas!_
(cp. wālā). II. = wæl. III. = wiell

wel- = hwel-, wæl-, weal-, wiel-

wēl- = wīel-

wela (a, ea, eo) m. _‘weal,’ prosperity, happiness, riches_ (often
in pl.), AO, CP.

Wēland m. _the Smith-God, Northern Vulcan_.

welbescēawod _discreet, considerate_.

welboren _well-born, of good family, noble_.

welcn = wolcen

weldǣd f. _good deed, benefit, kindness_.

weldēd = weldǣd

weldōend [CP] = weldōnd pres. ptc. of weldōn.

weldōn anv. _to do well_, CP: _benefit, satisfy, please_, MtL 15^15.

weldōnd m. _benefactor_, #Gl#.

weldōnnes f. _well-doing, kindness_, DR 13^17.

weleg = (1) wilig; (2) welig  [[(1) form of “wiliga”]]

welena gp. of wela.

weler (eo) mf. _lip_, Æ, CP.

weleðig _rich_, ANS 128^299.

welfremming f. _good deed, benefit_, DR 187^17.

welfremnes f. _benefit_, DR.

welg I. m. = wilig. II. adj. = welig  [[I. form of “wiliga”]]

welga = weliga wm. of welig adj.

welgā interj. _hail!_

welgeboren = welboren

wel-gecwēme, -gecwēmedlic _well-pleasing, acceptable_, #SPs#.

welgecwēmnes f. _favour_, DR.

welgedōn _well-done, good, beneficent_, CP.

welgehwǣr = welhwǣr

welgelīcian _to please well_: _be well pleased_.

welgelīcwirðe _well pleased, acceptable_, #VPs# 118^108.

welgelīcwirðnes f. _good pleasure_, #VPs# 140^7.

welgespring = welspring

welgestemned _having a good voice_, ANS 84·6.

welgetȳd _well-instructed_, ES 39·354.

welgewende _thriving_, MF (Vesp. D xiv)

welgewlite _beautiful_.

welgewlitegod _well-adorned_.

welgian = weligian

welhǣwen _well-hued, beautifully coloured_, CP 411^28.

welhrēowlīce = wælhrēowlīce  [[form of “wælhrēow”]]

welhwā pron. _each, every_.

±welhwǣr adv. _(nearly) everywhere_.

±welhwilc (e, y) pron. _each, any, nearly every_.

welig I. _well-to-do, rich, prosperous_, Æ, AO, CP. II. m. ‘_willow_.’

±weligian _to be prosperous, abound_: _enrich_, _Æ_. [v. ‘_awelgien_’]

weligstedende (woegl-) _making rich_, DR 98^9.

well = (1) will; (2) wel

wella = wiella  [[under “wiell”]]

wellā = wā lā

welle = wille

wellende (#VPs#) = willende pres. ptc. of willan.

wellere _bosom, fold, hollow_, WW.

wellibbende (y^2) _living well, well conducted, reputable_, CP.

wellīcian _to please well_, MFH 178.

wellīcung f. _agreeableness_, #EPs#.

wellīcwyrðe (u^3) _well-pleasing_, #BCPs# 146^10.

wellyrge (#Gl#) = wellere

welm = wielm

-welm v. fōt-w.

Wēlond = Wēland

welor = weler

welp = hwelp

welrēab (Ep, Erf 642) = wælrēaf

welrūmlīce adv. _graciously_, DR.

welrūmmōd _gracious_, DR 12^20.

wel-spring, -sprynge (CP) = wyll(ge)spring
  [[redirected to “wilspring”]]

welstincende _fragrant_, CP 439^33.

welswēgende _melodious_, #SPs# 150^5.

welt, welð = wielt, wielð pres. 3 sg. of wealdan, weallan.

welðungen † _honoured, in high repute_.

weluc = weoloc

welung f. _revolution_, OEG 28^30. [wielwan]

welweorðe _of high esteem_, #Lcd# 3·432^29.

welwilled- = welwillend-

welwillende _well-wishing, benevolent, kindly, good_, Æ, CP.

welwillendlīce _benevolently, lovingly, kindly_.

wel-wille(n)dnes, -wilnes f. _benevolence, goodwill, kindness_, Æ.

wel-wyll-, -wylle(n)d- = welwillend-

welwyrcend m. _well-doer_.

welwyrcende _well-doing_.

wem = wamm

wēman _to sound, be heard_, #An# 740: _announce_, #An# 1480: (±)
_persuade, convince, lead astray_.

wēmend m. _herald, declarer_, #El# 880.

wēmere m. _procurer_, WW 171^28.

±wemman (æ) _to defile, besmirch, calumniate, profane, injure,
ill-treat_, _Lk_; Æ, CP: _abuse, revile_. [wamm; v. ‘_awem_’]

+wemmednes f. _defilement_, Æ.

±wemmend m. _adulterer, fornicator_, OEG.

+wemmendlic _seducing, corrupting_, OEG 2912.

±wemming m. _defilement, blemishing, spoiling_, OEG: (+) _profanation_.

+wemmodlīce (æ) adv. _corruptly_.

wemnes = wemmednes

wen = (1) wynn; (2) wenn

wēn I. f. _belief, hope, opinion, expectation, supposition_, CP:
_probability_. w. is ðæt _perhaps_: _name of the rune for =w=_.
II. = wægn

+wēn _to bend, twist_, NC 297 (A 14·139).

wēna m. _hope, opinion, expectation, idea, fancy_, CP.

±wēnan (w. g. or a.) _to ‘ween,’ fancy, imagine, believe, think, expect,
hope, fear_, Æ, AO, CP: _wonder_, ES 37·191.

wenbȳl m. _boil, carbuncle_, #Lcd#.

wencel I. (i) n. _child_: _maid-servant_. II. = wancol

wend m. _what turns up, an event_.

+wend n. _snail-shell, snail_, WW. [windan]

±wendan _to turn, direct_, Æ, CP: _‘wend’ one’s way, go_, Æ, AO:
_return_: _change, alter, vary, restore_, Æ: _convert_: _translate_, CP.
[windan]

wēnde pret. 3 sg. of wēnan.

Wendelsǣ mf. _Mediterranean Sea_, AO.

-wenden v. ed-w.

wendend m. _that which turns round_, WW 489^12.

wendende _movable, revolving_, #Sc# 97^4.

wendere m. _translator, interpreter_, OEG 5259.

Wendle mp. _Vandals_.

wendung f. _change, turning, rotation_, CP.

+wene _perhaps_, MkR 14^2 (oe).

wēnendlic _to be hoped for_, GD 269^14.

wēnere = wægnere

wēnes = wǣnes

wēnestu = wēnstu

weng = wang

±wenge n. _cheek_, Æ. [wang]

wenian _to accustom, habituate, inure, train_, Æ, CP: _entertain,
treat_. w. mid wynnum _treat kindly_. w. tō wiste _feast, entertain_:
_break off_, _‘wean’ from_.

wēninga = wēnunga

wenlic _comely, beautiful_, Æ: ‘_conveniens_,’ MkL.

wenn I. mf. _‘wen,’ tumour_. II. (K) = wynn

wennan = wenian

wenncīcen n. _little wen_, ZDA 31·46.

wennsealf (wen-) f. _wen-salve, ointment for a tumour_, #Lcd#.

wenspryng m. _‘nævus,’ mole_, WW 451^19.

wēnstu = wēnst ðu pres. 2 sing. of wēnan.

wensum = wynsum

went pres. 3 sg. of wendan.

Wentas, Wente, Went-Sæte, -Sætas mp. _people of Gwent_ (roughly =
Monmouthshire).

wēnð pres. 3 sing. of wēnan.

wēnung f. _expectation, hope_, AO 112^12: _doubt_.

wēn-unga, -unge (ǣ) adv. _possibly, perhaps, by chance_, Æ.

wenwyrt f. _crowfoot_? _lesser celandine_? _darnel_? #Lcd#.

wēo (#Rd# 57^5) = wōh? or wēa?

wēobed, wēobud = wēofod

weoce I. f. _‘wick’ (of a lamp or candle)_. II. = wuce

wēocs = wēox pret. 3 sg. of weaxan.

wēocson pret. pl. of wacsan (= wascan).

wēocsteall (ES 11·64) = wēohsteall

weocu = wucu

wēod n. _herb, grass_, CP: ‘_weed_.’

weodewe = wuduwe

wēodhōc m. _weed-hook, hoe_, LL 455[15].

wēodian _to weed_, LL 454[9].

wēodmōnað m. _August_.

weodo, weodu == wudu

weoduma = weotoma  [[under “wituma”]]

wēodung f. _weeding_, WW 105^3.

weofan (#VPs#) = wefan

wēofed = wēofod

wēofod nm. _altar_, Æ, CP. [wīg; bēod]

wēofodbōt f. _fine for injuring a priest, which was applied in support
of the altar_, v. LL 2·276.

wēofodheorð (wībed-) m. _altar-hearth_, GD.

wēofodhrægl (wīgbed-) n. _altar-cover_, BH 90^2.

wēofod-scēat (Æ), -scēata m. _altar cloth_.

wēofodsteall m. _place of the altar_, LL (254n).

wēofod-ðegn, -ðēn m. _altar-attendant, priest_.

wēofodðēnung f. _altar-service_, LL 380[2].

wēofodwiglere (wīgbed-) m. _soothsayer_, WW 108^10.

+weofu pl. of +wef.

wēofud = wēofod

weofung f. _weaving_, WW 490^38.

wēog = wīg

weogas = wegas nap. of weg.

wēoh == wīg

wēohse = wēox pret. 3 sg. of weaxan.

wēohsteall m. _place of the altar, sanctuary, choir_, LL.

weol = weoll

weol- (A) = wel-

weolc I. pret. 3 sg. of wealcan. II. = weoloc

weolcn = wolcen

weolc-rēad, weolcen- = weolocrēad

weolctælg m. _purple dye_, WW. [telg]

weold pret. 3 sg. of wealdan.

weoll pret. 3 sg. of weallan.

weolm = wielm

weolme (= ea) f. _choice, pick of one’s fellow-creatures_, #Cr# 445.

weoloc (e, i, y) m. _‘whelk,’ cockle, murex_: _(purple) dye from the
murex_.

weolocbasu _purple_, #Gl#.

weolocbasuhǣwen _purple-coloured_.

weolocrēad _shell-fish red, scarlet, purple_.

weolocscyll (e^3) f. _whelk, cockle, shell-fish_.

weolt pret. 3 sg. of wealtan.

weonung = wining

wēop pret. 3 sg. of wēpan.

wēop- = wēp-

weor = wer I.

weorad = werod

weorc (e, o) n. _‘work,’ labour, action, deed_, CP: _exercise_: (†)
_affliction, suffering, pain, trouble, distress_ (v. JAW 52). weorcum
_with difficulty_: _fortification_.

+weorc n. _work, workmanship, labour, construction_: _structure,
edifice_, Æ: _military work, fortification_.

weorcan = wyrcan

weorccræft m. _mechanics_, OEG 55^6.

weorcdǣd (oe^1, ē^2) f. _action, operation_, DR 125^18.

weorcdæg m. _work-day_.

weorce I. † adj. _painful, bitter, difficult hard_. II. adv. _hardly,
with difficulty_.

weorcern n. _workshop_.

weorcful _active_, #Sc# 169^1.

weorcgerēfa m. _foreman, overseer_, Æ.

-weorcheard, -weorclic v. un-w.

weorchūs (e) n. _workshop_, WW.

weorcmann (e) m. _workman_.

weorcnes (y) f. _working, operation_.

weorcnȳten n. _working cattle_, LL 26n.

weorcrǣden f. _corvée-work_, EC 377^1.

weorcsige m. _success in work_, #Lcd# 1·3886^15 (v. A 31·58).

weorcstān m. _hewn stone_, Æ.

weorcsum _painful_, #Gen# 594.

weorcðēow mf. _servant, slave_.

weorc-uhta? m., -uhte? n. _hour of matins on a non-festival day_, NC 332
(cp. mæsseuhta).

weorcum v. weorc.

weorcwyrðe _fit for work, able-bodied_, MF 178.

weord = wyrd

weordungdæg (WW 206^32) = weorðungdæg

weored = werod I.

weoreld = woruld

weoren pp. of weosan.

weorf n. _beast of burden_ (v. CC 129), _cattle_.

weorf- = hweorf-

weorfemeoluc? f. _milk from wild cattle_? #Lcd# 102a (MS ðeorfe-).

weorftord (-oruf-) m. _excrement of cattle_, #PPs# 112^6.

weorht = worht pp. of wyrcean.  [[variant of “wyrcan”]]

+weorht = +wyrht

weorian = werian

weorld (#Bl#) = woruld

weorm = wyrm

weormian = wearmian

weorn = worn

weornan = wiernan

±weornian (u) _to pine away, become weak, fade, wither, destroy_, Æ.

weorod = werod I. and II.

weorold = woruld

+weorp n. _throwing, dashing, tossing_, #An# 306: _what is thrown up_.

±weorpan (o, u, y) I. sv^3 _to throw, cast, cast down, cast away_, Æ,
AO, CP: _throw off, out, expel_: _throw upon_. w. handa on _lay hands on
(a person)_: (w. d. pers.) _charge with, accuse of_: (+) _reach by
throwing_. [_Ger._ werfen] II. = wierpan

weorpere m. _thrower, caster_, #Rd# 28^7.

weorpian _to pine away_, #ERPs# 38^12.

weorras (Cp 161#c#) = wearras, nap. of wearr.

weort == wyrt

weorteard = ortgeard

weorð I. (e, ea, i, o, u, y) n. _‘worth,’ value, price, purchase-money,
ransom_, AO, CP. II. (ie, o, u, y) adj. _worthy, honoured, noble,
honourable, of high rank_, CP: _valued, dear, precious_, AO, CP: _fit,
capable_. III. = worð I.

±weorðan^3 (u, y) _to become, be_ (passive auxiliary), _be done, be
made_, CP: _happen, come to pass, arise, take place_, _AO, Jn_: (+)
impers. _get on with, please, agree_, _An, AO, Chr_: _think of, occur
to_. [‘_worth_,’ ‘_i-worth_’]

weorðe = weorð, wierðe

weorðere m. _worshipper_, JnL.

weorðful _worthy, honourable, honoured, glorious, good_, Æ (u).

weorðfullic (u) _worthy, honoured, honourable, distinguished_, CP. adv.
-līce, AO.

weorðfulnes f. _dignity, honour_, AO.

weorðgeorn _desirous of honour, high-souled_.

±weorðian (o, u, y) _to esteem, honour, worship, distinguish, celebrate,
exalt, praise_, _Bo, PPs_; AO, CP: _adorn, deck_: _enrich, reward_.
[‘_i-wurthi_’]

weorðiend (u) m. _worshipper_.

weorðig = worðig

weorðlēas (u) _worthless_, WW 130^20.

weorðlic _worthy, honourable, distinguished, exalted_, CP: _valuable_:
_fit, becoming_. adv. -līce.

weorðlicnes f. _worthiness, honour, estimation_.

weorð-mynd, -mynt (u) fmn. _honour, dignity, glory_, AO, CP: _mark of
distinction_.

weorðnes (e, ie, o, u, y) f. _worth, estimation_: _splendour, rank,
honour_: _integrity, uprightness_.

weorðscipe (o, u) m. _worth, respect, honour, dignity, glory_, AO, CP:
_advantage, good_. [‘_worship_’]

weorððearfa (u^1, y^1) _poor man_, #Bk# 12.

weorðung f. _honouring, distinction, honour, glory_, CP: _celebration,
worship_: _excellence_: _ornament_.

weorðungdæg m. _day for bestowal of honours or offices, festival_,
#Bk# 23.

weorðungstōw f. _place of worship, the Tabernacle_, Æ.

weoruc = weorc

weorud = werod

weoruf = weorf

weoruld == woruld

wēos gs. and nap. of wēoh.

weos- = wes-

weosan^{1?} [S 382#n#2] _to be or become weak_.  [[from first edition]]

weosnian = wisnian

weot- = wit-

weotod = witod

wēoðel == wēðel, wǣd(e)l

weoðerweard = wiðerweard

wēoðobān = wīðobān  [[headword spelled “wiðobān”]]

weoðobend = wudubinde I.

wēox pret. 3 sg. of weaxan.

weoxian _to cleanse_? A 9·261^262.

±wēpan^7 _to ‘weep,’ complain_, Æ, AO, CP: _bewail, mourn over,
deplore_, Æ.

wēpen == wǣp(e)n

wēpende adj. _weeping_, GD 18^31.

wēpendlic _deplorable, mournful_. adv. -līce.

wēpman = wǣpmann

wēpn == wǣpen

wēpned == wǣpned

  [[Printed on one line:
  wēpn, wēpned == wǣpen, wǣpned]]

wēpnian = wǣpnian

wer I. m. _man_, Æ, AO, CP: _husband_, Æ: (†) _hero_: _creature_, B 105.
II. m. _the legal money-equivalent of a person’s life, a man’s legal
value_ (= wergild), LL. III. m. _‘weir,’ dam, fish-trap_, CP; Mdf:
_catch, draught_. [werian] IV. (or were?) _troop, band_, WW, ÆL 30·195.

wēr = wǣr II.

weran = werian

werbēam m. _warrior_, #Ex# 486.

wer-borg, -borh m. _pledge for the payment of_ ‘wergild.’

werc (#Gl, VPs#) = weorc

wercan = wyrcan

wercyn n. _human race, tribe_, #Rim# 61.

werdan = wirdan

were = wer II.

wēre (M) = wǣre II.

were- = wer-

wered == werod

wēreg = wērig

weregan (#KGl#) = wiergan

werfǣhð f. _feud by which_ ‘wer’ _is incurred, breach of the peace_, LL.

werfan = hwierfan

werg == (1) wearg; (2) wyr(i)g

wergan (A) = (1) wiergan; (2) werian I.

wērgan wk. ds. of wērig.

wergeld = wergild

wergend = weriend

wērgenga = wǣrgenga

wergian = wiergan

±wērgian _to weary, exhaust_, Æ, AO, CP.

wergild (æ^1, e^2, i^2, y^2) n. _compensation, value of a man’s life_.
[wer I., v. LL 2·731]

wergildðēof m. _thief who might be redeemed by payment of his_
‘wergild,’ LL.

wergnes = weargnes

wergulu f. _crab-apple_, #Lcd# 3·34^14.

wērgum dsmn. of wērig.

wergyld = wergild

werhād m. _male sex, virility, manhood_, Æ.

werhbrǣde = weargbrǣde

werhta = wyrhta

werhyrde m. _keeper of a fishing-weir_.

wēri = wērig

±werian (æ) I. _to guard, keep, defend_, AO: _ward off, hinder, prevent,
forbid_: _occupy, inhabit_, #Gu# 322: _dam up_, CP 469^2. II. _to
clothe, cover over_: _put on_, _‘wear,’ use_.

wērian = wērgian

weriend m. _defender_, Æ.

werig = wyrig

wērig _‘weary,’ tired, exhausted, miserable, sad_, AO, CP:
_unfortunate_. [wōr]

werigan = werian

werigcweðan = wyrgcweðan

werigend = weriend

wērigferhð † adj. _weary, cast down_.

wērigian = wērgian

wērigmōd † _weary, cast down_.

werignes = wyrignes

wērignes f. _weariness_, Æ.

werilic = werlic

wērines = wērignes

wering f. _weir, dam_, CP 277^8.

werlād f. _clearing or exculpation by the oaths of a number of men
according to a man’s_ ‘wer,’ LL.

werlēas _without a husband_, LL.

werlic _male, masculine_, #ÆGr#: _manly_: _marital_. adv. -līce, Æ.

wērloga = wǣrloga

werm- = wearm-

wermǣgð † f. _tribe, nation_.

wermet n. _man’s treasure, stature_, WW.

wermōd m. _‘wormwood,’ absinthe_, Æ.

wern- = wearn-, wiern-

werna = wrenna

wer-nægl, -nægel m. (_man’s nail_?), _wart_, Æ.

werod (eo^1, e^2) I. n. [nap. werodu, werod] _throng, company, band,
multitude_, Æ: _host, army, troop, legion_, Æ, AO. [wer] II. _sweet_, Æ.
III. † n. _sweet drink, mead_.

werodian _to grow sweet_, #Bo# 51^4.

+werodlǣcan (e^2) _to make sweet or pleasant_, #Sc# 196^5.

werodlēst f. _lack of fighters_, #El# 63.

werodlīce adv. _sweetly_.

werodnes f. _sweetness, pleasantness_, Æ.

werold = woruld

wēron (M) = wǣron pret. pl. of wesan.

weroð = waroð

werp f. _recovery (from sickness)_, CP 457^16. [= wyrpe]

werpan = weorpan

werrēaf n. _civil clothing (i.e. not eccl. vestments)_, NC 332.

werrest (#Bl#) = wierrest

werscipe = wærscipe

werse = wierse  [[under “wiersa”]]

werst = wierrest

werstede m. _place of a weir_, EC 246^10.

wert (#KGl#) = wyrt

werte = wearte  [[under “weart”]]

wer-tihtle, -tyhtle f. _charge involving the penalty of_ ‘wer,’
_homicide_, LL.

werð = wierð pres. 3 sg. of weorðan.

werðēod † f. _folk, people, nation_.

werðnes (K) = weorðnes

werud = werod

weruld = woruld

wērun (NG) = wǣron

werwulf (-rew-) m. _‘werwolf,’ fiend_, LL.

wes (#VPs#) = wæs pret. 3 sg. of wesan.

wēsa m. _drunkard_. [wōs]

wesan anv. pres. 1 sg. eom, bēo, 2 eart, bist, 3 is, bið; pl. sindon,
sind; bēoð; pret. wæs, wǣron; subj. pres. sīe, sȳ, bēo; sīn, bēon; pret.
wǣre, wǣren _to be_: _happen_. v. also bēon. [_Ger._ wesen]

+wesan _to strive, contend_? #Sol# 181. [cp. +wosa]

±wēsan _to soak, macerate_. [wōs]

wesand = wesend

wesc = wæsc

wēse _moist, macerated_. [wōs]

wesend (eo) m. _bison_, #Gl#.

wesendhorn m. _bison’s horn_, TC 536^1.

wesendlīce ‘_essentialiter_,’ GD 336; 337.

wesing f. ‘_confectio_,’ ‘_debilitatio_,’ v. OEG 1857.

wesle, weosule (#Gl#) f. ‘_weasel_.’

+wesnes f. _dissension_, BH 274^5.

wesp = wæps

west adv. _westwards_, _‘west,’ in a westerly direction_, AO.

westan, westane adv. _from the west_, AO. be westan (prep. w. d.)
_west of_.

±wēstan _to lay waste, ravage, devastate_, AO. [_Ger._ wüsten]

westanhealf f. _west side_.

westannorðan _northwest (wind)_, OEG.

westansūðan _southwest_, AO.

westansūðanwind m. _southwest wind_, #CVPs# 77^26.

westanwind m. _west wind_, AO 17^15.

West-Centingas mp. _people of West Kent_, #Chr# 999.

westdǣl m. _west quarter, western part_, Æ, AO.

West-Dene mp. _West Danes_, B.

wēste _waste, barren, desolate, deserted, uninhabited, empty_, Æ, AO.

westem (#VPs#) = wæstm

westema v. westerne.

wēsten I. nmf. _waste, wilderness, desert_, Æ, AO, CP. II. adj. _waste,
desolate_, Æ.

westende m. _west end_, AO.

wēstengryre m. _terror of the desert_, #Ex# 117.

wēstensetla m. _hermit, anchorite_, Æ.

wēstenstaðol m. _waste place_, #Ruin# 28.

westenwind = westanwind

wēstern = wēsten

westerne _western, westerly_; wester(r)a _more westerly_; westema,
westmest (AO) _most westerly_.

westeweard = westweard

westhealf f. _west side_, Æ.

wēstig (oe) _waste, deserted, desert_, NG.

westlang adv. _extending westwards_, KC.

westm (#VPs#) == wæstm

westmearc f. _western boundary_, OET 484.

westmest v. westerne.

wēstnes f. _desolation_: _desert place_, #EPs# 77^19.

westnorðlang adv. _extending north-westwards_, AO 22^17.

westnorðwind m. _north-west wind_, WW.

westra = westerra; v. westerne.

westrīce n. _western kingdom_, AO.

westrihte (y^2) adv. _due west, westwards_, AO.

westrodor m. _western_ (= _evening_) _sky_.

west-Sǣ f. _western sea_.

West-Seaxe, -Seaxan mp. _West Saxons_: _Wessex_.

westsūðende m. _south-western extremity_, AO 8^23.

westsūðwind m. _south-west wind_, WW.

westu = wes ðu 2 pers. imperat. of wesan.

West-Wēalas mp. _Cornishmen_, #Chr#.

west-weard, -werd adv. _westwards, towards the west_, Æ.

westweg m. _western way_, #PPs# 74^6.

westwind m. _west wind_, BH 458^17.

wesule = wesle

wēt I. pres. 3 sg. of wēdan. II. adj. = wǣt

wet- = wæt-

wēt- = wǣt-

wetēdre = wæterǣdre

+wetfæstan = +wedfæstan

wetma = weotoma  [[under “wituma”]]

weðan _to assuage, make calm_, #PPs# 106^28.

wēðe _sweet, mild, pleasant_ (A).

weðel _swathe, bandage_, WW 22^14.

wēðel = wēðl, wǣdl

wēðelnes = wǣdelnes

weðer I. m. _wether sheep, ram_, Æ. II. = weder I.

weðercynn n. _the wether or male kind_.

weðerwynde = wiðewinde

wēðl == wǣdl

±wēðnes f. _suavity, mildness_.

wex (#VPs#) == weax

wexe = weax

wēxon = wēoxon pret. pl. of weaxan.

wh- = hw-

wī I. = wīg. II. (K) = weg

wiaht (K) = wiht

wiarald, _wiaruld_ (K) = woruld

wibba m. _crawling thing, beetle_, WW 121^25.

wībed (#VPs#) = wēofod

wiber = wifer

wibil (#Gl#) = wifel

wībora = wīgbora

wīc nf. _dwelling-place, lodging, habitation, house, mansion_, CP:
_village, town_: in pl. _entrenchments, camp, castle, fortress_:
_street, lane_: _bay, creek_. [‘_wick_’; v. Mdf]

wic- = wuc-

±wīcan^1 _to yield, give way, fall down_.

wīcbora = wīgbora

wicca I. m. _wizard, magician, soothsayer, astrologer_, Æ. II. = wicga

wicce (y) f. ‘_witch_,’ Æ.

wiccecræft m. _witchcraft, magic_, Æ.

wiccedōm m. _witchcraft_, #Bk# 20; HL 11^123.

wiccian _to use witchcraft_, LL.

wiccliende ptc. _tottering_, #Gl#.

wiccræft (#Cra# 70) = wiccecræft? or wicgcræft (_skill with
horses_)? (BT).

wiccung f. _enchantment_.

wiccung-cræft, -dōm m. _witchcraft_.

wicdæg = wucdæg

wice I. mf. _‘wych’-elm_. II. = wuce. III. = weoce

wīce f. _office_, Æ: _officer_, #Chr# 1120.

wīceard m. _dwelling-place_, #Gu# 907.

wīceng = wīcing

wicfreoðu f. _protection of a dwelling_, #GnE# 129.

wicg (y) n. _horse, steed_ (very rare in prose).

wicga m. _insect, beetle_.

wīcgefēra (#Chr# 897#a#) = wīcgerēfa

wīcgerēfa m. _bailiff, reeve of a_ ‘wīc’ _or vill_, #Chr# 897#bcd#:
_‘publicanus,’ tax-gatherer_.

wicgung = wiccung

wīcherpað m. _a public road to a_ ‘wīc’ (BT), KC 3·418^26.

±wīcian _to dwell, lodge, rest in_, Æ, AO: _encamp, bivouac_, CP:
_harbour, anchor_, AO. [wīc]

wīcing m. _pirate, viking_, AO.

wīcingsceaðe? f. _piracy_, #Gl#.

wīcnera, wīcnere (Æ) m. _steward, bailiff_.

wīcnian _to attend upon_, Æ, RB 127^3.

wīcscēawere m. _provider of a home_, #Bl# 163^12.

wīcsteall m. _camping-place_, #Ex# 92.

wīcstede † m. _dwelling_.

wīcstōw f. _dwelling-place, residence_: _camp, encampment_, Æ, AO.

wīctūn m. _vestibule, court_, #PPs#.

wicðēn == wucðegn

wicu == wucu

wid = wið

wīd _‘wide,’ vast, broad, long_, Æ, AO, CP. w. and sīd _far and wide_.
tō wīdan ealdre, tō wīdan fēore, wīdan fyrhð _for ever_.

wīdan adv. _from far_ (v. also wīd).

wīdbrād _wide-spreading_, #Gen# 643.

wīdcūð adj. _widely known, celebrated_, Æ.

wīde adv. _widely, afar, far and wide_, Æ, AO, CP. sīde and w. _far and
wide_.

wīdefeorh † = wīdeferhð

wīdefeorlic (wīder-) _eternal_, WW 117^21.

wīde-ferhð †, -fyrhð I. mn. _(long life), long duration, long time_. II.
adv. _always_.

wider- = wiðer-

+wi-der pl. -dru n. _weather (good or bad)_, _storm, tempest_, AO.
[weder]

+widerian (impers.) _to be fine weather_, LL 454[12].

widewe = wuduwe

wīdfæðme † _ample, extensive_.

wīdfarend m. _wanderer_, CP 315^4.

wīdfeorh = wīdeferhð

wīdfērende † _coming from afar_.

wīdferhð = wīdeferhð

wīdfloga † m. _wide-flier (of a dragon)_.

wīdfolc † n. _great nation_.

wīdgal == wīdgil

wīdgangol _wandering, roving_, CP.

wīdgenge _wandering (monk)_, OEG 58^10.

wīd-gil, -gill (e, ie) _wide-spread, broad, extensive_, Æ, CP:
_wandering_, GD.

wīdgilnes f. _amplitude, spaciousness_, Æ.

wīdgongel = wīdgangol

wīdgyl = wīdgil

wīdhergan _to extol_, CP 439^34.

wīdian _to become wider_, GD 315.

wīdl mn.? _impurity, filth, defilement_.

wīdland † n. _extensive country_.

wīdlāst † I. _far-wandering_. II. m. _long wandering, long way or road_.

±wīdlian _to defile, pollute, profane_.

wīdmǣre _far-famed, celebrated, well-known_, AO, CP.

±wīdmǣrsian (tr., intr.) _to spread abroad, divulge_, Æ: _celebrate_.

wīdmǣrsung f. _proclamation, publication_? #Sc# 96^11.

wīdmērsian = wīdmǣrsian

wīdobān = wiðobān

widor = weder

widor- = wider-

wīdor comp. of wīd.

wīdrynig _far-flowing_, #An# 1509.

wīdsǣ mf. _open sea, ocean_, Æ, AO.

wīdsceop adj. _far extended, widely distributed_, #Pa# 8.

wīdscofen _scattered far and wide_, B 936.

wīdscrīðol _erratic_.

wīðsīð † m. _long journey_: _traveller in many countries_.

wīdðil (DR 98^12) = wīdl

widu == wudu

widuw-, widw- = wuduw-

wīdwegas † mp. _distant regions_.

wīebed = wēofod

wiebel = wifel

wiece = wuce

Wieht = Wiht

wīel = wealh

wielde _powerful, victorious_, AO 156^22.

+wieldend (y) _subduer_, GPH 391.

wielede pret. 3 sg. of wielwan.

wīelen (ī, ȳ) f. _foreign woman, female slave_, AO.

wīelincel n. _little servant, slave_, GPH 401.

wīelisc (ǣ, ē, ēa, ī, ȳ) _foreign_: ‘_Welsh_’: _not free, servile_.
[wealh]

wiell, wiella m., wielle (AO) f. (e, i, y) _‘well,’ fountain, spring_,
Mdf. [weallan]

wielle = wille pres. 3 sg. of willan.

wielm (a, æ, e, eo, i, y) m. _boiling, swelling, surf, billow, current,
stream_: _burning, flame, inflammation_: _fervour, ardour, zeal_, CP.
[weallan]

wielmfȳr (æ) n. _blazing fire_, #Cr# 932.

wielmhāt (y) _burning hot_, #Gen# 2584.

wieln- = wiln-

wielt I. pres. 3 sg. of wealdan. II. = wielð

wielð pres. 3 sg. of weallan.

wielwan (y) _to roll_.

wien- = win-

wieoldon = weoldon pret. pl. of wealdan.

±wierdan (e, i, y) _to spoil, injure, destroy_.

wiergan (æ, e, i, iri, yri, y) _to abuse, outlaw, condemn, curse,
proscribe_, CP: _do evil_. [For compounds v. wyrg-, wyrig-] [wearg]

wiergen f. (gs. wiergenne) _she-wolf_.

wiernan (e, i, y) (w. g. of thing and d. of pers.) _to withhold, be
sparing of, deny, refuse, reject, decline_, AO, CP: _forbid, prevent
from_. [wearn]

wiernung (æ) f. _refusal_, LL 152[3].

wierp m. _cast, throw, shot, blow_, AO.

±wierpan (æ, y) _to recover from illness, get better_, CP.

wierpð pres. 3 sg. of weorpan.

wierrest (superl. of yfel) ‘_worst_,’ CP.

wiers (y) adv. ‘_worse_,’ CP.

wiersa m., wierse fn. (comp. of yfel) ‘_worse_,’ CP. [For comps.
v. wyrs-]

wiersian (y) _to get worse_, Æ.

wierslic (y) _bad, vile, mean_.

wierst = wierrest

wierð pres. 3 sg. of weorðan.

wierðe (i, u, y) = weorð II.

wīese = wīse pl. of wīs.

wieste = wiste, v. witan.

wiet- = wit-

wīet- = wīt-

  [[Printed on one line:
  wiet-, wīet- = wit-, wīt-]]

wiexð pres. 3 sg. of weaxan.

wīf n. _woman, female_, Æ, AO, CP: _‘wife,’ lady_, Æ, AO, CP.

+wif I. n. _fate, fortune_. [wefan] II. n. _a disease of the eye_, #Lcd#
3·292^2.

wīfcild n. _female child_, BH 76^9.

wīfcynn n. _womankind, female sex_.

wīfcȳððu f. _company of a woman_? _intercourse with a woman_? #Chr#
755#a#.

+wife = +wif

wifel I. m. _‘weevil,’ beetle_. II. = wifer

wifer _missile, arrow, dart_, v. OEG 1103.

wīfērend (#KGl#) = wegfērend

wīffæst _bound to a wife, married_, LL 348[54].

wīffex n. _woman’s hair_, WW. [feax]

wīffrēond m. _female friend_.

wīfgāl _licentious, unchaste_, CP 453^30.

wīfgehrine m. _contact with women_.

wīfgemædla m. _woman’s talk_, #Lcd# 122b.

wīfgemāna m. _intercourse with a woman_, #Lcd# 1·336.

wīfgeornes f. _adultery_, MtL 15^19.

wīfgifta fp. _dowry, outfit_? _marriage_? #Jul# 38.

wīfhād m. _womanhood_, Æ: _female sex_, Æ.

wīfhand f. _female inheritor, female side_, Ct.

wīfhealf f. _woman’s (i.e. mother’s) side_.

wīfhearpe f. _timbrel_, #CPs# 150^4.

wīfhīred n. _nunnery_, GD 27^8.

±wīfian _to take a wife, marry (of the man)_, _Æ_. [‘_wive_’;
‘_i-wive_’]

wīflāc n. _cohabitation, fornication_, LL.

wīflēas _unmarried_, LL (190^3).

wiflēast f. _lack of women_, ÆL 10^216.

wīflic _womanly, feminine, female_, Æ. adv. -līce.

wīflufu † f. _love for a woman_.

wīfmann (o^2) m. ‘_woman_,’ Æ, AO, CP: _female servant_.

wīfmyne m. _love for a woman_, #Gen# 1861.

-wifre v. gange-w.

+wifsǣlig _fortunate_, WW 496^8.

wīfscrūd n. _woman’s clothing_, ÆP 142; TC 530.

wift = weft

wīfðegn m. _procurer_, WW.

wīfðing n. _marriage, cohabitation_.

wīfung f. (+) _marrying (of the man)_, _wedlock_, Æ: (pl.) _wives_.

wīg I. n. _strife, contest, war, battle_, Æ, AO, CP: _valour_: _military
force, army_, Æ. II. (wīh, wēoh) † n. _idol, image_.

wiga m. _warrior, fighter_: _man_.

wīgan^1 _to fight, make war_, Æ.

wīgār m. _spear, lance_. [wīg, gār]

wīgbǣre _warlike_, WW 193^18.

wīgbealu n. _war-bale_, B 2046.

wīgbed == wēofod

wīgbill n. _sword_, B 1607.

wīgblāc _bravely caparisoned_, #Ex# 204.

wīgblēd? m. _luck in war_, #Rim# 26 (wilbec).

wīgbora m. _fighter_, #ÆGr# 27^16.

wīgbord † n. _shield_.

wīgcræft m. _war-power, art of war_, AO.

wīgcræftig _strong in battle_, B 1811.

wīgcyng = wīcing

wīgcyrm m. _noise of battle_, #Gen# 1990.

wīgelung = wīglung  [[headword spelled “wiglung”]]

wīgend † m. _warrior, fighter_.

wīgende _fighting_, Æ.

wīgfreca † m. _warrior_.

wīgfruma † m. _war-chief_.

wigg = (1) wīg I.; (2) wicg

wigga = wicga

wīggebed = wēofod

wiggend = wīgend

wīggetāwe fp. _war-gear_, B 368. [wīg, geatwe]

wīggild (wīh-) n. _idol_.

wīggryre m. _war-terror_, B 1284.

wīghaga † m. _war-hedge, phalanx_.

wīgheafola m. _helmet_, B 2661.

wīghēap m. _troop of warriors_, B 477.

wīgheard _brave in battle_.

wīghete m. _hostility_, B 2121.

wīghryre m. _slaughter, defeat_, B 1619.

wīghūs n. _battlement, tower_, AO, CP: _turret (on an elephant’s back)_,
ÆL 25^560.

wīghyrst f. _war-gear, accoutrements_, #Ruin# 35.

wīgian _to fight_, LL 132[6,5].

wigle n. _divination_, OEG.

wīglēoð n. _war-cry, battle-signal_, #Ex# 221.

wiglere m. _soothsayer, wizard_, Æ.

wiglian _to take auspices, divine_, Æ.

wīglic _warlike_. adv. -līce.

±wiglung f. _soothsaying, augury, witchcraft, sorcery_, Æ.

wīgmann m. _warrior_, LL, W.

wīgnoð m. _warfare, war_, WW 442^1?

wigol _divining, foreboding_, WW 133^2.

wīgplega † m. _war-play, battle_.

wīgrād (ō) f. _war-path_, #Gen# 2084.

wīgrǣden f. _state of war, battle_, #Wald# 1^22.

wīgsigor † m. _victory in battle_.

wīgsīð m. _military expedition_, #Gen# 2094.

wīgsmið I. m. _maker of idols_, #PPs# 113^12. II. † m. _warrior_.

wīgspēd † f. _success in war_.

wīgspere n. _war-spear, dart_, WW 143^14.

wīgsteall n. _rampart, entrenchment_.

wīgstrang _mighty in war_, WW 360^36.

wīgtrod n. _path of an army_, #Ex# 491.

wīgðracu † f. _onslaught in battle, attack_.

wīgðrīst _bold in battle_, #Jul# 432.

wīgur = wīgār

wīgwægn m. _war chariot_, AO.

wīgwǣpen n. _weapon of war_, W 170^8.

wīgweorðung † (ēoh^1) f. _idol-worship, idolatry_.

wīh = wīg

wīhaga = wīghaga

wihst pres. 2 sg. of weaxan.

wiht I. (u, y) fn. _‘wight,’ person, creature, being_: _‘whit,’ thing,
something, anything_. II. adv. _at all_. ne w., nǣnig w. _not at all_.
nān w. _no whit_. III. n. ‘_weight_.’

Wiht f. _Isle of Wight_, #Chr# [_L._ Vectis]

wihte adv. (d. instr. of wiht) _at all_.

+wihte n. ‘_weight_.’

wihtga = wītega

Wihtland n. _Isle of Wight_, Æ.

wihtmearc f. _plumb-line_, OEG 3005.

Wiht-sǣtan, -sǣte mp. _inhabitants of the Isle of Wight_.

Wihtware mp. _inhabitants of the Isle of Wight_.

wīhūs = wīghūs

wil = wiell

wīl n. _‘wile,’ trick_, #Chr# 1128.

wil- = will-

wila (y) ‘_catenarum_,’ v. OEG 3560n and 7^257.

wīlamcel? (wīluncel? GPH 401) = wīelincel

wīlāwei = wā lā wā

wīlbec m. _stream of tears, lamentations_? #Rim# 26. [or? wīgblēd]

+wilbod n. _commandment_, WW 191^22.

wilboda m. _messenger of joy, angel_, #Gu# 1220.

+wilcð n. _rolling, tossing_, #JPs# 88^10. [wealcan]

wilcuma I. m. _welcome guest_. II. = wilcume

wilcume interj. _welcome!_

±wilcumian _to welcome, greet_, Æ.

wild? _wild_, OEG 4706n.

wildæg m. _day of joy_, #Cr# 459.

±wildan _to control, tame, subdue, conquer, seize_: (+) _compel_, LL
265[15]: (+) _temper_.

wilddēor = wildēor

wilddēoren _pertaining to wild beasts, fierce_, #Sc# 99^7.

wilddēornes f. _abode of wild beasts, desert, wilderness_.

wilde I. _‘wild,’ untamed, uncontrolled_, Æ, AO: _uncultivated, desert_,
AO. II. adv.

+wilde (y) _in the power of, under the control of_, Æ.

wildēar (N) = wildēor

wildefȳr n. _lightning_, #Chr#: _erysipelas_, WW.

wildēor n. (occl. dp. wildrum) _wild beast_, Æ, AO: _deer, reindeer_.

wildēorlic _animal-like, savage_, CP. adv. -līce.

wilder, wildor = wildēor

wildeswīn m. _wild boar_, ANS 129·44.

wildgōs f. _wild goose_, WW 364^1.

-wildian v. ā-w.

wile pres. 3 sg. of willan.

+wile = +will

wileg = wilig  [[form of “wiliga”]]

wilege = wilige  [[under “wiliga”]]

wīlen = wīelen

wilewīse = _wiligwīse_

wilfægen _fain, glad_, Æ.

wilfǣmne f. _beloved woman_.

wilfullīce adv. _willingly_, OEG.

wilgæst m. _welcome guest_, #Mod# 7 (e^2).

wilgedryht † f. _willing band_.

wilgehlēða † m. _intimate companion_. [hlōð]

wilgeofa = wilgiefa

wilgesīð † m. _willing companion_.

wilgest = wilgæst

wilgestealla = willgestealla

wilgiefa † (eo, i) m. _gracious giver, king_.

wilhrēmig _rejoicing in satisfied desire_, WW 376^26.

wilhrēðig _exultant_, #El# 1117.

wilia = wiliga

wilian (Æ) = wielwan

±wilian (y) _to connect, bind_, #Sc# 11^8; W.

wilie = wilige  [[under “wiliga”]]

wiliga m., wilige (Æ) f. _basket_.

wiligwīse (wile-) _basket-wise_, #Bl# 125^21.

wiliht (y) _full of willows_, Ct.

wīlisc = wīelisc

will I. n. = willa m. II. (e, y) m. _fountain, spring_, CP.

+will n. _will, wish, desire_, AO.

will- = wyll-

willa m. I. _mind, will, determination, purpose_, Æ, CP. sylfes willum
_of one’s own accord_: _desire, wish, request_: _joy, delight,
pleasure_: _desirable thing, valuable_. II. (æ, e, y) _fountain,
spring_.

willan (y) anv. pres. 1, 3 sg. ind. and subj. wile, wille, wielle, pret.
wolde _to ‘will,’ be willing, wish, desire_, AO, CP: (denoting habit,
repetition), _to be used to_: _to be about to_: (sign of the future
tense) _shall, will_, AO, CP.

willcuma = wilcuma

wille (e, y) fm. _fountain, spring_. [weallan]

willeburne (y) † f. _spring_.

willecærse f. _watercress_.

willen = wyllen

-willen v. dol-w.

wīllendlic (BH) = hwīlwendlic

willendlīce adv. _willingly_, WW.

willes adv. _willingly, voluntarily_, Æ.

willestrēam (y) † m. _stream_.

willewæter (y) n. _spring water_, #Lcd#.

willfægen = wilfægen

willflōd † m. _flood_.

willgebrōðor mp. _brothers_, #Gen# 971.

willgesīð = wilgesīð

willgespryg = wilspring

willge-steald, -steall n. _riches, wealth_, #Gen# 2146?

willgestealla m. _willing companion_, #Gen# 2146?

willgesweostor fp. _sisters_, #Gen# 2607.

willgeðofta ‡ m. _pleasant companion_.

±willian _to wish, desire_.

willic (y) _from a fountain_, WW.

willīce (y) adv. _willingly, voluntarily_.

willnung = wilnung

willsele m. _pleasant dwelling_, #Ph# 213.

willsīð = wilsīð

willspell † n. _good tidings_, #El#.

willsum == wilsum

willung = wilnung

willwong m. _pleasant plain_, #Ph# 89.

wilm = wielm

wīln = wīelen

+wilnes f. _desire, wish_, #LPs# 20^3.

±wilnian (w. g. or a.) _to wish, long for, desire, will_, Æ, AO, CP:
_beg for, supplicate, entreat, petition for_: _tend towards_, CP.

±wilniendlic _desirable_: _capable of desire_, ÆL 1^97.

±wilnung f. _desire, longing_, AO, CP.

wiloc = weoloc

Wil-sǣte, -sǣtan mp. _people of Wilts_: _Wiltshire_.

wīlsc = wīelisc

wilsīð m. _desired journey_.

wil-spring, -sprynge (e^1, y^1) m. _spring_.

wil-sum, -sumlic _desirable, delightful_: _ready, willing, voluntarily,
spontaneous_: _devoted_. adv. -līce.

wilsumnes f. _willingness, devotion_: _vow_.

wilt I. pres. 2 sg. of willan. II. pres. 3 sg. of wealdan.

wiltīðe _having obtained one’s wish, glad_, OEG 2219^3589.

wilð pres. 3 sg. of weallan.

wilðegu f. _agreeable food_, #An# 153.

wiluc- = weoloc-

wīluncel = wīelincel

wīlwendlic = hwīlwendlic

wimman, wīman = wīfmann

wimpel (win-) m. _‘wimple,’ covering for the neck, cloak_, #Gl#.

win == winn

wīn n. ‘_wine_,’ Æ, CP. [_L._ vinum]

wīnærn n. _tavern, cellar_, #Gl#: _drinking hall, wine hall_, B 655.

wīnbælg = wīnbelg

wīnbēam m. _vine_, WW.

wīnbeger n. _grape_, NG.

wīnbelg (æ) m. _(leather) bottle for wine_.

wīn-berge, -beri(g)e f. _wine-berry, grape_.

wīnbōh m. _vine-shoot, vine_, Æ.

wīnbrytta m. _wine-seller, inn-keeper_, WW.

wīnburg † f. _festive city_: _walled vineyard, castle_.

wīnbyrele m. _innkeeper_, WW 377^4.

wincan = wincian

wince f. _winch, pulley_, WW 416^6.

wincel I. m. _corner_, Ct. [_Ger._ winkel] II. = wencel

wincettan _to wink_, #PPs# 34^19.

wincian _to ‘wink,’ blink_, Æ, CP.

winclo = wenclu, nap. of wencel.

wīnclyster n. _cluster of grapes_, OEG 18#b#^2.

wīncolc _wine vat_, WW 439^30.

wīncynn n. _wine_, NC 333.

wind m. ‘_wind_,’ Æ, AO, CP.

+wind n. _winding thing, winding path_, WW.

windæddre f. _windpipe_, WW.

±windæg † m. _day of strife or toil_.

±windan^3 (tr.) _to ‘wind,’ plait, curl, twist_: _whirl, brandish,
swing_: (intr.) _turn, fly, leap, start, roll, slip, go_, Æ, AO, CP:
_delay, hesitate_, #Gu# 265.

windbǣre (ē^2) _windy_, OEG 43^10.

windbland (o^2) n. _blast of wind_, B 3146.

+winde _blowing_, BH 202^7.

-winde v. ed-, næddre-, wudu-w.

windecræft = wyndecræft

windel m., gs. windles _basket_, Æ.

windelocc m. _curly lock_, WW.

windelstān m. _tower with a winding staircase_, (BT), WW 145^17.

windelstrēaw n. ‘_windle-straw_,’ WW.

windeltrēow n. _oleaster, willow_, WW.

wind-fona, -gefon m. _winnowing fan_.

windfylled _blown down_, LL 452[19].

windgereste f. _resting-place of the winds_, B 2456?

windhlæden (a^2) _windy_.

windig _windy, breezy_, Æ.

windiht (GPH) = wundiht

windil = windel

windiuscoful = windscofl

windles v. windel.

windong _something woven, hurdle_.

windrǣs m. _storm of wind_, MkL 4^37.

wīndrenc (i, y) m. _wine-drink, wine_, Æ.

wīndruncen _elate, intoxicated with wine_.

windscofl _fan_, WW 478^25.

windsele m. † _(windy hall), hall of misery, hell_.

windswingel f. _(wind-whip), fan_, WW 154^10.

windumǣr (wudu- ?) f. _echo_, WW 474^8.

windung f. _winnowing, chaff, tares, straw_, NG.

windwian wv. _to fan, ‘winnow.’_ [wind]

windwig = windig

windwigceaf n. _chaff_, OEG 2439.

windwigsyfe n. _winnowing-sieve, fan_, WW 141^11.

wine † m. [occl. gp. winig(e)a] _friend, protector, lord_. [wynn]

wīneard == wīngeard

wine-dryhten (i^3) † m., gen. -dryhtnes _friendly lord, lord and
friend_.

wīnegeard = wīngeard

winegēomor _mourning for friends_, B 2239.

winelēas † _friendless_.

winemǣg † m. _dear kinsman_.

wīnern = wīnærn

winescipe m. _friendship_.

winestre = winstre

winetrēow f. _conjugal fidelity_, #Hu# 50.

wineðearfende † _friendless_.

winewincle f. _periwinkle (shell-fish)_.

wīnfæt n. _wine-vessel, wine-vat_, WW.

+win-ful, -fullic _laborious, tedious, hard_, BH, GD. adv. -līce.

wīngāl † _flushed or intoxicated with wine_.

wīngeard m. _vineyard_: _vine_.

wīngeardbōg m. _vine-tendril_, WW 118^3.

wīngeardhōc m. _vine-tendril_, WW 201^31.

wīngeardhring m. _cluster of grapes or other fruit_, WW 213^17.

wīngeardseax n. _(vine-) pruning knife_, WW 234^44.

wīngeardwealh (wīneard-) m. _worker in a vineyard_, NC 333.

wīngedrinc n. (†) _wine-drinking, drinking bout_: _wine_, WW.

wīngerd = wīngeard

wīngetredde = wīntredde

wīngyrd = wīngeard

wīnhāte f. _invitation to wine_, #Jud# 8.

wīnhrēafetian _to gather grapes_, #LPs# 79^13.

wīnhūs n. _wine-house, tavern_.

winiga, winigea v. wine.

wining (eo, y) m. _leg-band, garter_.

wīnland n. _wine-growing country_, NC 333.

wīnlēaf n. _vine-leaf_, OEG 18#b#^73.

wīnlic _vinous, like wine_, Æ.

wīnmere m. _wine-vat_, WW 439^30.

±winn n. _toil, labour, trouble, hardship_, _BH, Lk_: _profit, gain_,
#PPs#: _conflict, strife, war_, _Bo_; AO. [‘_i-win_’]

±winna m. _enemy, adversary_, Æ, CP.

winnan^3 (y) _to labour, toil, trouble oneself_: _resist, oppose,
contradict_: _fight, strive, struggle, rage_, _Bl_. on w. _attack_: (+)
_conquer, obtain, gain_, _Chr, Met_: _endure, bear, suffer_. [‘_win_’;
‘_i-win_’]

+winnesful = +winful

±winnstow f. _wrestling place_.

winnung = windung

winpel = wimpel

wīnreced † n. _wine-hall_.

wīnreopan^5 (y) _to gather in the vintage_. [repan]

wīnsæd _satiated with wine_, #Jud# 71.

wīnsæl n. _wine-hall_, #Wa# 78.

wīnsele † n. _wine-hall_.

wīnsester m. _wine-vessel_, WW 122^31. [_L._ sextarius]

winstōw = winnstōw  [[headword spelled “winnstow”]]

winstre I. adj. _left_, Æ, CP. II. f. _left hand_.

winsum == wynsum

wint pres. 3 sg. of windan.

wīntæppere m. _wine-tapster, tavern-keeper_, OEG 2652.

winter mn. [ds. wintra; nap. wintru, winter] ‘_winter_,’ Æ, AO, CP: pl.
(in computing time) _years_, Æ, AO, CP.

winterbiter † _bitterly cold_.

winterburna m. _winter-torrent_, JnL 18^1.

winterceald † _wintry-cold_.

wintercearig _winter-sad, sad with years_? #Wa# 24.

winterdæg m. _winter’s day_, #Bo#.

winterdūn f. _hill on which sheep were kept in winter_? LL 453[1].

winterfeorm f. _Christmas feast_, LL 452[21,4].

winterfylleð _October_.

wintergegong m. _fate_, WW 406^6.

wintergerīm † n. _number of years_.

wintergetel † n. _number of years_.

wintergewǣde ‡ n. _garment of winter, snow_.

winterge-weorp, -worp n. _winter-storm, snowstorm_, #Ph# 57.

winterhūs n. _winter-house_, ÆL 36^95.

winterig = wintrig

winterlǣcan _to grow wintry_.

winterlic _wintry, belonging to winter, winter_, Æ.

winterrǣdingbōc f. _lectionary for the winter_, TC 430^16.

winterrīm = wintergerīm

wintersæt = wintersetl

winterscūr m. _winter-shower_, #Ph# 18.

winterseld = wintersetl

wintersetl n. _winter-quarters_, AO, #Chr#.

wintersteal m. _stallion a year old_, LL 378[7].

winterstund f. _winter-hour, short time, year_? #Gen# 370.

wintersufel n. _food for winter_, LL 450[9].

wintertīd f. _winter-time_, Æ.

wīntīber n. _wine-offering, libation_, WW 130^13 (-tīfer).

+wintīd f. _time of affliction_, GD 210^15.

wintra v. winter.

-wintre v. ān-, twi-w., etc.

+wintred _grown up, adult_: _aged_, AO.

wīntredde f. _winepress_, OEG 2647.

wintreg = wintrig

wīntrēow n. _vine_, Æ.

wīntrēowig adj. _of the vine_, GPH 390.

wintrig _wintry_, AO.

wīntrog m. _wine-vessel_, MtL 21^33.

wīntunne f. _wine-cask_ (or? wīntūn _wine-house_), ÆP 19^1.

wīntwig n. _vine-twig_, WW.

winð pres. 3 sg. of winnan.

wīnðegu † f. _banquet of wine_.

wīnwircend m. _vine-dresser_.

+winworuld f. _world of care_, #Gu# 829.

wīnwringe f. _winepress_.

wio- = weo-, wi-, wu-

wīohbed = wēofod

wīpian _to ‘wipe,’ cleanse_, Æ.

wīr I. † m. _‘wire,’ metal thread, wire-ornament_. II. (ȳ) m. _myrtle_,
#Gl#; Mdf.

wir- = wear-, wier-, wyr-

wīrboga m. _twisted wire_? #Rd# 15^3.

wirc- = weorc-, wyrc-

+wirdan (e, y) _to spoil, injure, destroy_: _violate, obstruct_.

wirding (oe, y) f. _bodily injury_, LL 410[3,5]: _blemish_, OEG 649.

wirdnes f. _injury, vice_, DR (oe).

+wīred _made of wire_, TC 537^34.

wirg- (Æ) = wierg-, wyr(i)g-

wirgrǣfe? f. _myrtle-grove_, WW.

wirian = wiergan

wirig- = wierg-, wyr(i)g-

wirpð pres. 3 sg. of weorpan.

wīrtrēow n. _myrtle_, #Lcd#, WW.

wīrtrēowen (y^1, ȳ^2) adj. _myrtle_, #Lcd# 1·236^1

wirtruma = wyrtruma  [[under “wyrtrum”]]

wirð I. = weorð I. II. = wierð pres. 3 sg. of weorðan.

wirðe = worð I.

wīs I. adj. _‘wise,’ learned_, Æ, AO, CP: _prudent, discreet,
experienced_, Æ, AO, CP. II. = wīse I.

+wis == wiss

wīsa † m. _leader, director_.

wisan = wesan

wīsan (#Dan# 35) = wīsian

wīsbōc f. _instructive book_? #PPs# 138^14.

wīsc- (Æ) = wȳsc-

wisce n. _a piece of meadow_, PST 95/98, 542.

wischere m. _diviner_? ÆL 21^466.

wīsdōm m. _‘wisdom,’ knowledge, learning_: _experience_, Æ, CP.

wīse I. f. _‘wise,’ way, fashion, custom, habit, manner_, Æ, CP:
_testamentary disposition_: _business, affair, thing, matter_, Æ, CP:
_condition, state, circumstance_, AO, CP: _reason, cause_, Æ:
_direction_: _melody_: _idiom_. II. adv. _wisely_. III. (ȳ) f. _sprout,
stalk_.

wīs-fæst, -fæstlic _wise, sagacious, discreet, learned, intelligent_.

+wīsfullīce _wisely_, GD 95^31.

wīshycgende _wise, sagacious_, B 2716.

wīshȳdig † _wise, discreet, sagacious_.

±wīsian (w. d. or a.) _to direct, instruct, guide, lead_, Æ, CP: _point
out, show_, _Gen_. [‘_i-wisse_’]

wislic _certain, sure, true_. adv. (±) -līce _certainly, truly_, _Lcd,
Lk_: _moreover_. [‘_iwisliche_’]

wīslic _wise, sagacious, prudent_, Æ, AO. adv. -līce.

wisligan = wistlian  [[redirected to “hwistlian”]]

wisnian _to dry up, wither, waste away_. [weornian]

+wiss I. n. _certainty, surety_, Æ. II. adj. _certain, sure,
trustworthy_, _BH, Bo, Guth, Nic_. tō gewissan, gewissum; mid gewisse
_especially, certainly_, _RB, HL_. [‘_i-wis_’]

wiss- = wis-

wisse = wiste pret. 3 sg. of witan.

wīssefa m. _wise-souled man_, #Sol# 438?

wissian = wīsian

±wissian _to direct, instruct, guide_, _Æ_: _point out, show_, Æ.
[‘_i-wisse_’]

wiss-iend, -igend m. _governor, director_: _driver (of chariot)_, Æ.

+wisslīce = +wislīce

wisste = wiste pret. 3 sg. of witan.

wissum (tō) adv. _altogether, completely_, OEG.

±wissung f. _showing, instruction, guidance_, _Æ_: _rule, regulation,
government_, Æ (in comp.). [v. ‘_iwisse_’]

wist f. _being, existence_: _well-being, abundance, plenty_: _provision,
nourishment, subsistence, food, meal, feast, delicacy_, Æ, CP. [wesan]

wiste pret. 3 sg. of witan.

wīstfæstlic = wīsfæstlic  [[under “wīsfæst”]]

wistfulgend m. _banqueter_, #EPs# 41^5.

wistfull _productive_, #Chr# 1112.

±wistfullian _to feast_, Æ.

wistfullīce adv. _luxuriously_, WW 513^6.

wistfullnes f. _good cheer_.

±wistfullung f. _feasting_, OEG.

wistfyllo f. _fill of food_, B 734.

wistgifende _fertile_, WW 457^25.

+wistian _to feast_, G.

wistl- = hwistl-

+wistlǣcan _to feast, banquet_, G.

wist-mete m., nap. -mettas, _sustenance_, ÆL 23b^582.

wiston pret. pl. of witan.

wisðlung = wistlung  [[redirected to “hwistlung”]]

wīswyrdan _to be wise in speech_, A 13·38.

wīswyrde _prudent in speech_, W 72^18.

wit I. pron. 1 pers. (nom. dual), gs. uncer, d. unc, acc. unc(it) _we
two_, CP. wit Æthered _Æthered and I_. II. (±) = witt

±wita (eo, ie, u) m. _sage, philosopher, wise man, adviser, councillor,
elder, senator_ (v. LL 2·737), Æ, AO: _witness_, Æ, CP: _accomplice_.
[‘_wit_’; witan]

±witan (eo, y) swv. pres. 1, 3 sg. wāt, 2 wāst, pl. witon, subj. pres.
sg. wite, pl. wit-en, -on; pret. sg. wiste, pp. witen _to be aware of or
conscious of, know, understand_, _BH, LG_; AO, CP: _observe, perceive_.
andan w. _dislike_. incan w. (tō) _to have a grudge (against)_. ege w.
_to fear_. dōn tō witanne _to cause to know, inform_. [‘_wit_’;
‘_i-wite_’]

wītan^1 (+) _to look, behold, see_, #PPs# 79^14: _guard, keep_, Æ:
_impute or ascribe to, accuse, reproach, blame_, AO, CP: (±) _depart,
go, go out_: _die_ (often forðgew.).

wīte n. _punishment, torture, plague, injury_, Æ, CP: penalty, fine:
_contribution, in money or food, to sustenance of king or his officers_,
LL 356[69,2]: _woe, misery, distress_.

wītebend † mf. _bonds of torture or punishment_.

wītebrōga m. _tormenting dread_.

witedlīce = witodlīce

wīte-dōm (wītig-) m. _prophecy, prediction, presage, oracle_.

wītedōmlic _prophetic_, #Guth#.

wītefæst _penally enslaved_, TC.

wīt-ega, -(i)ga m. _wise man_: _prophet, soothsayer_: _prophecy_.
[wītan; _OHG._ wīzzago]

wītegeard? m. _amphitheatre_, v. OEG 3333.

wītegdōm (i^2) m. _prophecy, prediction_: _divination_.

wītegestre f. _prophetess_, Æ.

±wītegian _to prophesy, predict_, Æ, AO.

wītegung f. _prophecy, divination_, Æ.

wītegungbōc f. _book of prophecy_, Æ.

wītehrægl n. _penitential garb, sackcloth_, #PPs# 68^11.

wītehūs n. _torture-house, prison, hell_: _amphitheatre (as place of
torture and martyrdom)_, OEG.

wītel = hwītel

wītelāc † n. _punishment_.

wītelēas _without punishment or fine_, LL 360[73,4].

wītelēast f. _freedom from punishment or fine_.

wītelic _toilsome, carking_, MFH 178: _penal_, GD 330; 332.

witelīce (GD 102^24) = witodlīce

witenagemōt n. _meeting of the wise men, national council_. [wita]

+wītende _transitory_, MFH 165.

wītendlic = wītigendlic

+wītendlic _transitory, perishable_, Æ, CP.

witendlīce = witodlīce

+wit-endnes, -ennes f. _departure, death_.

wīterǣden f. _punishment, fine_.

+witerian _to inform_, #Kl# 17^44. [witter]

wītern n. _prison_, WW 199^31. [ærn]

wītescræf n. _pit of torment, hell_, #Sat# 691.

wītesteng m. _pole used for torture_, OEG.

wītestōw f. _place of torment or execution_.

wīteswing ‡ m. _scourging, punishment_.

wītetōl n. _instrument of torture_.

wīteðēow adj. _man reduced to slavery by the law_ (also sbm.).

+witfæst _of sound mind_, #Guth# 66^17.

wītg- = wīteg-

witian (eo) _to order, arrange, provide, destine, conclude, establish_.

witiendlic = witigendlic  [[headword spelled “wītigendlic”]]

wītig = wittig

wītig- = wīteg-

wīt-igendlic, -t(i)endlic _prophetic_, OEG.

wītiglic _punitive, of punishment_, GD.

wītingstōw = wītnungstōw

±witlēas _foolish, mad_, Æ.

witlēasnes f. _want of intelligence, folly_, OEG 47^3.

±witlēast f. _folly, madness_. [witt]

+witloca † m. _mind_, †CP.

witmæreswyrt f. _spoonwort_? #Lcd# 12a.

wītnere m. _tormentor, torturer_, Æ.

±witnes f. _knowledge_, _‘witness,’ testimony_, _Bl, Bo_: _a witness_.
[‘_i-witness_’]

±witnian _to punish, chastise, torture, afflict_, Æ, AO, CP.

wītnigend m. ‘_punitor_,’ #EPSs# 78^11.

wītnung f. _torment, torture, punishment, purgatory_, Æ.

wītnungstōw f. _place of punishment, purgatory_, Æ.

witod I. = witodlīce. II. pp. of witian.

witodlic _certain, sure_, LkR 20^6 (wutud-); adv. -līce _truly, for,
verily, certainly, undoubtedly, indeed, thus_, Æ, AO, CP. [witan] conj.
_but, and, for, therefore, wherefore_. [witan]

witol _knowing, wise_. [witan]

witolnes f. _wisdom_, GD 331^15.

witon I. pret. pl. of witan. II. = wuton

wītrod = wīgtrod

+witscipe m. _testimony, evidence_.

+witsēoc _possessed, insane_, Æ.

±witt n. _understanding, intellect, sense_, _Bo, Lk_: _consciousness_.
[wit; ‘_i-wit_’]

+witt- = +wit-

witter _wise, prudent_, #Chr# 1067#d#. [_ON._ vitr]

±wittig † _wise, sagacious, skilful_: _in one’s right mind_, Æ.

wittignes f. _intelligence_, OEG 78 (wytti-).

wittol = witol

wītu nap. of wīte.

witud == witod

wituma (e, eo, y) m. _dowry_ (v. LL 2·739).

witumbora m. _bridesman, paranymph_, OEG 1774.

wītungstōw = wītnungstōw

wītword n. _written evidence, will, covenant_, LL.

wið I. prep. (w. a.) _with, by, near, against, beside, at, through_:
(w. d.) _from (separation)_, _with (opposition)_, _for, in return for,
on condition of, beside, near, opposite_: (w. g.) _towards, to, at,
against_. w. ēastan (1) adv. _to the east_; (2) prep. _east of_. w. ūp
_upwards, above_. w. ðān ðe _because, in consideration of, provided
that_. wið...weard prep. (w. a.) _towards_. II. conj. _until_.

wiðæftan I. adv. _from behind, behind, after_. II. prep. _behind,
at_, Æ.

wiðblāwan^7 _to blow away_, CP 439^24.

wið-bregdan^3, -brēdan^3 _to withhold, restrain, withstand, oppose_,
Æ, CP.

wiðcampian (o) _to fight against_.

wiðcēosan^2 _to reject_. pp. wiðcoren _rejected, reprobate, outcast_.

wiðcostian ‘_reprobare_,’ NC 333.

wiðcwædenes = wiðcwedennes

wiðcwedennes f. _contradiction_.

wiðcwedolnes = wiðercwedolnes

wiðcweðan^5 _to speak against, contradict, gainsay, oppose, resist_, Æ:
_forbid, refuse, deny_: _reject, renounce_, CP.

wiðcweðenes = wiðcwedennes

wiðdrīfan^1 _to repel, drive off_, #PPs#.

wiðe- = wiðig-

wiðēadon (N) = wiðēodon pret. pl. of wiðgān.

wiðēastan _eastward, eastwards_, AO.

wiðeftan = wiðæftan

wiðer prep. and adv. _against_.

wiðerbreca (a^3, eo^3, o^3, u^3) m. _adversary_: _the devil, Satan_.

wiðerbrocian _to oppose_, #CVPs#.

wiðerbrōga m. _adversary, the devil_, #Cr# 564.

wiðerbruca = wiðerbreca

wiðercerran _to turn against, prance_. [cp. wiðercyr]

wiðercora m. _adversary, rebel, apostate, sinner_, Æ.

wiðercoren _rejected, reprobate, wicked_.

wiðercorennes f. _reprobation_, ÆH 2·290^19.

wiðercwednes f. _contradiction_, CP 143^20.

wiðercwedol _opposing, contradicting_.

wiðercwedolnes f. _contradiction_, #Gl#.

wiðercwedung f. _a speaking against, contradiction_, #SPs# 51^4.

wiðercweð- = wiðercwed-

wiðercweðan^5 _to withstand_.

wiðercwida (y) m. _contradictor_, OEG 1893: _opposer, rebel_, WW 110^23.

wiðercwide m. _contradiction_: _opposition, resistance_.

wiðercwidel- = wiðercwedol-

wiðercwyd- = wiðer-cwed-, -cwid-

wiðercyr m. _rearing (of a horse)_, #El# 926.

wiðerdūne (ē^3, y^3) _narrow_, NC 333.

-wiðere v. tō-w.

wiðerfeoht- = wiðfeoht-

wiðerflita m. _opponent, adversary_, AO, CP.

wiðerflītan^1 _to contend against_.  [[from first edition]]

wiðerhabban _to resist_, #PPs# 72^20.

wiðerhlinian _to lean against_, #Gl#.

wiðer-hycgende, -hȳdig _refractory, perverse, antagonistic, hostile_. as
sb. _rival, adversary_.

wiðerian _to resist, oppose, struggle against_, Æ: _irritate, provoke_:
_be provoked_.

wiðerlǣcan (y^1, ē^3) _to deprive_, #EPs# 83^13.

wiðerlēan † n. _requital_.

wiðerling m. _opponent, adversary_, EHy 4^7.

wiðermāl n. _counter-plea, defence_, #Chr# 1052.

wiðermēde _stiff-necked, antagonistic, perverse_.

wiðermēdnes (oe) f. _perversity_, DR: _adversity_, DR.

wiðermēdo f. _antagonism_: _perversity_: _adversity_.

wiðermetan^5 _to compare to, measure with, measure against_.

wiðermōd _unwilling, adverse, contrary_, CP 212^7.

wiðermōdnes f. _adversity_, CP 83^19.

wiðermoednes (DR) = wiðermēdnes

wiðerrǣde _contrary, opposed, adverse, perverse, rebellious_, Æ:
_disadvantageous_: _disagreeable, unpleasant_.

wiðerrǣdlic _contrary, adverse_, #ÆGr# 264^1.

wiðerrǣdnes f. _opposition, discord, variance, disadvantage,
adversity_, Æ.

wiðerræhtes (= rihtes) adv. _opposite_, B 3039.

wiðerriht n. _recompense_, WW 118^12.

wiðersaca m. _adversary, enemy_, Æ: _betrayer_: _apostate_, Æ.

wiðersacian _to renounce, become apostate_, OEG: _blaspheme_.

wiðersacung f. _apostasy_: _blasphemy_.

wiðersæc I. n. _contradiction, hostility, opposition_, Æ: _apostasy_.
[sacan] II. _unfavourable_, #Lcd# 97a.

wiðersprǣc f. _contradiction_.

wiðerstǣger _steep_, WW.

wiðerstandan^6 _to resist_, #EPs# 16^8.

wiðersteall (a^3) m. _resistance, opposition_, Æ.

wiðersȳnes adv. _‘widdershins,’ backwards_, #Bl# 93^19.

wiðertalu f. _contradiction_, ÆH 1·530^6.

wiðertīhtle f. _counter-charge_, LL.

wiðertrod † n. _return, retreat_.

wiðertȳme _troublesome, grievous_.

wiðerweard _contrary, perverse, adverse_: _rebellious, hostile_, AO, CP:
_inconsistent_: _unfavourable, noxious, bad_.

wiðerwearda m. _adversary_, #Bl#.

wiðerweardian (y^3) _to oppose_.

wiðerweardlic _contrary, inimical, perverse_, Æ. adv. -līce.

wiðerweardnes f. _opposition, perversity, arrogance, enmity_, Æ, CP:
_adversity, calamity, trouble_, CP.

wiðerwengel m. _adversary_, ARHy 4^7.

wiðerwennung f. _controversy_, #Sc# 146^15. [winnan]

wiðer-werd-, -wi(e)rd- = wiðerweard-

wiðerwinn n. _contest_, OEG 2^3.

wiðerwinna m. _opponent, rival, adversary, enemy_, Æ, AO, CP.

wiðerwinnan^3 _to revolt_, GPH 389.

+wiðerworded (i^2) _opposed_, DR 114^1.

wiðerwyrd == wiðerweard

wiðewinde = wiðowinde

wiðfaran^6 _to come off, escape_, #Ex# 573.

wiðfeohtan^3 _to fight against, rebel_.

wiðfeohtend m. _adversary_, CP.

wiðfēolan^3 _to apply oneself to_, BH.

wiðferian † _to rescue, redeem_.

wiðflita = wiðerflita

wiðflītan = wiðerflītan

wiðfōn^7 (w. d.) _to grasp at, clutch_, B 760.

wiðforan I. prep. _before, in the presence of_. II. adv. _before,
previously_.

wið-gān anv., -gangan^7 _to go against, oppose_: _pass away, vanish,
disappear_.

wiðgehæftan = wiðhæftan

wiðgemetnes f. _comparison_, BH 430^20.

wiðgeondan prep. _beyond_, Mt 3^5.

wiðgrīpan^1 _to grapple with_, B 2521.

wiðgȳnan _to reject_, ÆL 23·541.

wiðhabban (w. d.) _to oppose, resist, restrain, hold out_, AO.

wiðhæbban = wiðhabban

wiðhæftan _to take possession of_.  [[from first edition]]

wiðheardian _to harden_, #ARSPs# 94^8.

wiðhindan adv. _behind_, Æ.

wið-hogian ‡ (w. g.) _to disregard, reject_.

wiðhycgan † _to reject, despise, scorn_.

wīði- = wīðig-

wīðig, wīði(g)e m. _withe_, _‘withy,’ willow_, Æ: _band, fetter, fillet,
garland_.

wīðigrind f. _willow bark_, #Lcd# 37a.

wīðing- = wīðig-

wiðinnan I. adv. _‘within,’ from within_, Æ. II. prep. (w. d. a.)
_within_.

wið-inne, -innen, -innon = wiðinnan I.

wiðir- (N) = wiðer-

wiðlǣdan _to lead away, take away, rescue_, #Ps#.

wiðlǣdnes f. _abduction_.

wīðlan (N) = wīdlan  [[variant of “wīdlian”]]

wiðlicgan^5 _to oppose, resist_.

wiðmetan^5 _to compare with, liken to_, Æ.

wiðmētednes f. _invention, device_, #SPs#. [mētan I.]

wið-metenlic, -metendlic _comparative (in grammar)_, #ÆGr#. [metan]

wiðmetennes f. _comparison_, Æ.

wiðmeting f. _comparison_.

wið-neoðan (Æ), -niðan, -nyðan adv. _below, underneath, beneath_.

wiðobān (wido-) n. _collar-bone_.

wiðone (#Bl#) = wið ðone

wiðor- = wiðer-

wiðowinde f. _convolvulus, woodbine_, #Gl#.

wiðrǣde = wiðerrǣde

wiðre † n. _resistance, opposition_.

wiðrēotan^2 _to abhor_? _resist_? #El# 369 (GK).

wiðrian = wiðerian

wiðsacan^6 _to oppose, strive against_, AO: _to refute, contradict_:
_forsake, abandon, renounce, refuse, deny_, Æ, AO, CP.

wiðsacendlic _used in negations_, #ÆGr# 226^3.

wiðsacung f. _denial, renunciation_, #Sc# 60^14.

wiðsceorian (o^2) _to refuse_, CP 59^12.

wīðscrīðel = wīdscrīðol

wiðscūfan^2 _to thrust back, refute, repel_, BH.

wiðsēon^5 _to rebel, rise against_, AO.

wiðsetnes f. _opposition_, #Gl#.

wiðsettan _to withstand, resist_, Æ.

wiðslēan^6 _to oppose, bring to naught_, Æ, CP.

wiðsprecan^5 _to contradict, gainsay_: _converse_, AS: _revile_: _speak
with_, GD 345^8.

wiðspurnan^3 _to hit against_, MtL 4^5.

wiðstæppan^6 _to step or go out of_.

wiðstandan^6 (w. d.) _to ‘withstand,’ resist, oppose_, Æ, AO, CP.

wiðstandend m. _opponent_.

wiðsteall = wiðersteall

wiðsteppan = wiðstæppan

wiðstond- = wiðstand-

wiðstunian _to dash against_, #Lcd# 160b.

wiðstyllan _to retreat_, WW 17^26.

wiðstyltan _to hesitate, doubt_, MtL 21^21.

wiðtēon^2 _to take away, withdraw_: _restrain_, CP.

wiðtremman _to step back_, CP 441^27.

wiððe f. _withy, cord, band, thong, fetter_. [v. also wīðig]

wiððer- = wiðer-

wiððingian _to come to terms with, be reconciled to_, MF 178.

wiððir (DR 168^2) = wiðer

wiððyddan _to blunt_, v. OEG 4235.

wiðufan I. prep. (w. d.) _above_. II. adv. _before, previously_.

wið-uppon, -uppan adv. _above_.

wiðūtan I. prep. (w. d.) _outside of_, AO: _except_: _without_. II. adv.
_from outside, outside_, Æ.

wiðweorpan^3 † _to reject, repudiate_.

wiðwinde = wiðewinde

wiðwinnan^3 _to fight against, resist, oppose_, AO, CP.

wiðwiðerian _to resist, withstand_, GD 117^19.

wixð = wiexð pres. 3 sg. of weaxan.

±wlacian _to become lukewarm, be tepid_, Æ, CP.

wlaco, wlacu, wlæc _tepid, lukewarm, cool_, CP.

wlacunes = wlæcnes

wlæc v. wlaco.

wlæce n. _tepidity_, GPH 397.

wlæclic _lukewarm_. adv. -līce.

wlǣclīce (#PPs# 148^5) = wrǣclīce

wlæcnes f. _lukewarmness_, CP.

wlæffetere m. _stammerer_, GPH 403.

wlæffian _to stammer, speak indistinctly_, v. NC 333.

wlænc = wlanc, wlenc

wlænco = wlenco  [[under “wlenc”]]

wlǣta = wlǣtta

+wlǣtan _to defile, debase_, #Bo# 114^23.

wlætlīce = wlæclīce

wlǣtta m. _loathing, nausea, eructation, heartburn_, Æ: _an object of
loathing_: _disfigurement_, OEG 4461.

wlǣtung (ā, ē) f. _nausea_: _disfigurement_, OEG 4461.

wlanc (æ, o) _stately, splendid, lofty, magnificent, rich_: _boastful,
arrogant, proud_.

wlancian _to become proud or boastful, exult_.

wlanclic adj. _proud, arrogant_. adv. -līce, #Gl#.

wlāt pret. 3 sg. of wlītan.

wlātere m. _spectator_, NC 333.

-wlātful v. nebb-w.  [[headword spelled “nebwlātful”]]

wlātian I. † _to gaze, look upon, behold_. [wlītan] II. (impers.) _to
loathe_, Æ.

wlātung I. f. ‘_spectaculum_,’ NC 334. II. = wlǣt(t)ung

±wleccan _to make tepid_, CP. [wlæc]

wlenc, wlenco (AO, CP), wlencu f. _pride, arrogance, haughtiness_:
_glory, pomp, splendour_, AO, CP: (†) _bravado_: _prosperity, riches,
wealth_. [wlanc]

+wlencan _to render proud_: _adorn, enrich, exalt_.

wlēttung = wlǣtung

wlisp, wlips (Æ) _lisping_.

wlispian _to lisp_.

wlita m. _countenance_, #Gl#.

wlītan^1 † _to gaze, look, observe_.

wlite m. _brightness_: _appearance, form, aspect, look, countenance_:
_beauty, splendour_, Æ: _adornment_, CP.

wliteandet? n. _confession of splendour_, #PPs# 103^2.

wlitebeorht † _beauteous_.

wliteful _beautiful_, #Sc# 21^8.

wlitelēas _ugly_, #An# 1171.

wlitelīce _handsomely_, #Bl# 205^6.

wlitescīne (ȳ^3) _lovely, beautiful_.

wlītesēon f. _sight, spectacle_, B 1650.

wlitetorht † _brilliant, lovely_.

wlitewamm (o^3) m. _disfigurement of the face_.

wliteweorð n. _legal value of a man’s life, ransom_, GD 179^21.

wlitig _radiant, beautiful, fair, comely_, Æ, CP. adv. -ige, -iglīce.

wlitigfæst _of enduring beauty_, #Ph# 125.

±wlitigian _to beautify, adorn_: _become beautiful_, #Seaf# 49: _form,
fashion_, #Pss#.

wlitignes f. _beauty, splendour_, #Bl#.

wlitu = wlite

wlō = wlōh

wlōh f., dp. wlō(u)m _fringe, ornament, tuft_: _bit_, #Gu# 1127.

+wlōh _adorned_, #Gen# 1789.

wlonc = wlanc

wlott _spot, blemish_, OEG 648?

wlōum v. wlōh.

wlyt- = wlit-

wō == wōh

wōc (pret. of wacan).

wōcer = wōcor

wocie, wocige _noose_, OEG 962; 3560.

wōclic = wōhlic

wōcor † f. (gs. wōcre) _increase, growth_: _offspring, progeny,
posterity, race_: _usury_.

wocorlīce = wacorlīce  [[form of “wacor”]]

wōcs = wōsc pret. 3 sg. of wascan.

wōd I. adj. _mad, raging, senseless_, Æ, AO: _blasphemous_. II. pret. 3
sg. of wadan.

wōda I. m. _madman_, Æ. II. m. _storm, flood_? _danger_? TC 341^8.

wodawistle = wodewistle

woddor n. _throat, gullet_? #Sol# 95.

wōddrēam m. ‘_dæmonium_,’ #RPs# 95^5 (v. ES 38^25).

wōdelic = wōdlic

Wōden m. _Woden_: _Mercury_.

wōdendrēam m. _madness_, WW 245^10.

wōdenesdæg = wōdnesdæg

wodewistle f. _hemlock_, #Gl#.

wōd-frec, -fræc _madly ravenous_.

wōdheortnes f. _madness_, MFH 178.

wōdian = wēdan

wōdlic _mad, furious_, Æ. adv. -līce _madly, furiously_:
_blasphemously_.

wōdnes f. _madness, frenzy, folly_, Æ.

Wōdnes gs. of Wōden.

wōdnesdæg m. _Woden’s day, Wednesday_.

wōdnesniht f. _Tuesday night_.

wōdōm = wōhdōm

wōdon pret. pl. of wadan.

wōdscinn n. _madness, folly_, W 80^3.

wōdscipe m. _insanity_, WW 245^12.

wōdsēoc _mad_, GD 135^1.

wōdsēocnes f. _madness_.

wōdðrāg f. _paroxysm, madness, rage, fury_, CP.

woe- (A) = we-, wē-

woecan (N) = wæccan

woerc- (N) = weorc-

woerd- = wird-

woffian _to shout, rave_: _blaspheme_.

woffung f. _doting, madness, raving_: _blasphemy_.

wōg == wōh

wōgere m. _wooer, suitor, sweetheart_, Æ.

wōgerlic _amorous_, NC 334.

wōgian _to woo, court, marry_, #Sc#.

wōgung f. _wooing_, ÆL 7^301.

wōh I. n. _bending, crookedness_: _error, mistake_, Æ: _perversity,
wrong, iniquity, depravity_. on w. _wrongly, wickedly_. II. adj. _bent,
awry, twisted, crooked_: _wrong, perverse, evil, depraved, bad, unjust_:
_false (weight)_, W 70^3. on wōn _wrongfully, in error_.

wōhbogen † _bent, crooked_.

wōhcēapung f. _fine for illegal trafficking_, KC 5·143^22.

wōhdǣd f. _wrong deed, crime_.

wōhdōm m. _unjust judgment_, A 8·336.

wōhfōted _having deformed feet_, WW 161^30.

wōhfremmend m. _evildoer_, #Met# 9^36.

wōhful _wicked_, NG.

wōhfulnes f. _wickedness_, NG.

wōhgeorn _inclined to evil_, W 183^8.

wōhgestrēon n. _ill-gotten property_, W.

wōhgod n. _false god, idol_.

wōhhǣmed n. _fornication, adultery_, CP.

wōhhǣmend m. _fornicator, adulterer_, CP.

wōhhǣmere m. _fornicator, adulterer_, CP 401^30.

wōhhandede _maimed (of the hands)_, WW 161^29.

wohhian? _to speak wildly, rave_? NC 334.

wōhlic _perverse, wrong, unjust, evil_. adv. -līce, Æ.

wōhnebb n. _grimace_.

wōhnes f. _crookedness, crooked place_, Æ: _wrong, error_:
_wickedness_, Æ.

wōhs, wōhson = wōsc, wōscon pret. 3 sg. and pret. pl. of wascan.

wōhsum _evil_, DR 27^9 (wōg-).

wōl mf. _pestilence, plague, mortality, disease_, AO, CP.

wōlbǣrnes f. _calamity, pest_, AO 62^34.

wōlberende _pestilential, pernicious_, CP.

wōlberendlic _pestilential_, #Chr# 1086.

wōlbryne m. _pestilence_, AO 86^24.

wolc (WW 175^20) = wolcen

wolc- = walc-, wolcen-

wolcen nm. (nap. wolcnu) _‘convolutio,’ ball, lump_, #PPs# 147^5:
_cloud_, Æ: _sky, heavens_. [‘_welkin_’]

wolcenfaru † f. _scudding of clouds_.

wolcengehnāst n. _meeting of clouds (in a storm)_, #Rd# 4^60.

wolcenrēad = weolocrēad

wolcenwyrcende? ptc. _cloud-making (Centaurs)_, WW 456^24.

wolcn == wolcen

wolcrēad = weolocrēad

wolcspinl = walcspinl

wol-cyrge, -cyrige = wælcyrige

wold = weald

wōldæg m. _day of pestilence_, #Ruin# 26.

wōldberendlic = wōlberendlic

wol-de, -don pret. 3 sg. and pret. pl. of willan.

wōlgewinn n. _calamitous war_, AO 64^15.

wōlic == wōhlic

wollentēare _weeping, with flowing tears_, B 3032.

-wolma v. fōt-w.  [[under “fōtwelm”]]

wom == wam(m)

wōm I. = wōgum dp. of wōh, adj. II. = wōma

wōma m. _noise, howling, tumult_: _terror, alarm_. swefnes w.
_dream-tumult, vision_: _eloquence_? OEG 8b^10.

woman intr. _to infringe_, EC 151^16: (+) tr. w. d. pers. and g. thing
_deprive of_, EC 151^17. [wamm]

won I. = wan, wann. II. pret. 3 sg. of winnan.

wōn I. wk. gdsn. and dpmn. of wōh. II. = hwōn

won- = wan-

wōna gp. of wōh II.

wondor = wundor

wōnes = wōhnes

wong == wang

wōp I. m. _cry, shrieking, weeping, lamentation_, Æ, CP. [wēpan] II. =
wēop pret. 3 sg. of wēpan.

wōpdropa m. _tear_, #Sol# 283.

wōpen pp. of wēpan.

wōperian _to weep_, HL 18^32.

wōpig _sad, lamenting_, Æ.

wōplēoð n. _dirge, elegy_, OEG 3504.

wōplic _tearful, sad_, Æ. adv. -līce.

wōpstōw f. _place of mourning_, Æ.

wōr = wōs, wāse  [[“wāse” headword spelled “wase”]]

wōra gp. of wōh.

worc == weorc

word I. n. _‘word,’ speech, sentence, statement_, Æ: _command, order_:
_subject of talk, story, news, report_, Æ, AO: _fame_: _verb_, Æ:
_(incarnate) Word_. II. _rod_, #CPs#: _(gooseberry) bush_? LkL 6^44
(v. ES 38·340; 40·152). III. = werod

word-bēot † n., -bēotung ‡ f. _promise in words, plighted word_.

wordcærse (WW 416^8) = *worðcærse, worðigcærse?

wordcennend m. _the begetter of the Word_, GPH 389.

wordcræft † m. _poetic art, eloquence_.

word-cwide, (e, y) -cwyðe m. _words, speech, language, utterance_.

worden pp. of weorðan.

wordes adv. _with words, verbally, orally_.

wordfæst _true to one’s word, true_.

wordful _talkative, verbose, fluent_.

wordgebēot = wordbēot

word-gecwide (æ^3) n., -gecweodu np. _verbal agreement_.

wordgemearc n. _definition or limitation by words_, #Gen# 2355.

wordgerȳne † n. _secret expressed in words, dark saying_.

wordglēaw _skilful in words_, #Da# 418.

wordgydd m. _lay, dirge_, B 3173.

wordhlēoðor † n. _voice, speech_.

wordhord † n. _treasury of words_.

wordig _wordy, verbose_, OEG 1416.

wordlāc n. _speech_, #LPs# 18^4.

wordlār f. _teaching_, NC 334.

wordlatu f. _delay in speech_? #An# 1519.

wordlaðu † f. _conversation, speech_.

wordlēan n. _reward for song_, #Rd# 78^9.

wordlian (u^1) _to talk, commune_: _conspire_, GD 106^1.

wordliend m. _speaker_, OEG 2321.

wordloc n. _art of logic_, WW 388^11.

wordloca † m. _(word-hoard), speech_.

wordloga m. _deceiver, liar_, W 40^10.

wordlung n. _talk, discourse_: _empty talk_.

wordmittung f. ‘_collatio_,’ WW 178^35.

wordpredicung f. _preaching_, NC 334.

wordrian = wordlian

wordriht n. _suitable word_, B 2631: _spoken law_, #Ex# 3.

wordsāwere m. _word-sower, rhetorician_, CP 97^4.

wordsige m. _success in speech_, #Lcd# 1·188^15.

word-snoter, -snotor _eloquent, rhetorical, wise in words_.

wordsnoterlic _philosophical, learned_, OEG 2270.

wordsnoterung f. _sophism_, OEG 2268.

wordsomnere m. _enumeration, catalogue_, WW 212^27.

wordsomnung f. ‘_collatio_,’ WW 178^35.

wordwīsa m. _sophist_, WW 493^30.

wordwrītere = wyrdwrītere

wordwynsum _affable_, WW 191^21.

wōre dsf. of wōh.

worf = weorf

worfian = woffian

wōrhana m. _moor-cock, cock pheasant_, #Gl#.

wōrhenn f. _hen pheasant_, WW.

wōrhona = wōrhana

worht pp., wōrhte pret. 3 sg. of wyrcan.

wōrian _to roam, wander_, Æ: _move round, totter, crumble to pieces_.
[wōr, wērig]

world == woruld

worm = wyrm

wormōd = wermōd

worms (u) nm. _matter, pus, virus_, AO, CP.

worn (ea, eo) m. _large amount, number, troop, company, multitude,
crowd_.

worngehāt n. _promise of numerous offspring_, #Gen# 2364?

wornlust = womlust  [[variant of “wamlust”?]]

wornmǣlum adv. _by troops_.

worod = werod

woroht = wrōht

worold (AO, CP) = woruld

worpan = weorpan

worpen pp. of weorpan.

worpian _to cast, throw, pelt_, CP.

worsm = worms

wort = wyrt

worð I. (eo, u) nm. _court, courtyard, curtilage, farm_, Mdf: _street_.
II. = waroð

worð- = weorð-

worðig (eo, u, y) m. _enclosed homestead, curtilage, farm_, Æ, CP; Mdf:
_street_.

worðigcærse f. _name of a plant_, #Lcd# 3·303.

worðignetele f. _nettle_.

worðscipe = weorðscipe

worud = werod I.

woruftord = weorftord

woruld (e^1, eo^1, ia^1; o^2) f. _‘world,’ age_, Æ, AO, CP: _men,
humanity_: _way of life, life_: _long period of time, cycle, eternity_.
tō worulde _for ever_. ā on worulda world, in woruld worulde _world
without end_.

woruldǣht f. _worldly possessions_.

woruldafol (-el) n. _secular or worldly power_, LL, W (ES 45·161).

woruldār f. _worldly honour_, CP: _secular property_.

woruldbearn n. _man_, #Rd# 81^27.

woruldbisgu f. _worldly occupation_, LL.

woruldbisgung (eo^1, y^2) f. _worldly business_: _worldly misery,
trouble_.

woruldbismer (o^2) nm. _worldly reproach_, CP 61^10.

woruldbliss f. _worldly bliss_, #Gu# 135.

woruldbōt f. _compensation prescribed by the secular power_, LL 128[2].

woruld-broc n., -bryce (o^2) m. _worldly trouble_, CP 259^2: _use for
secular purposes_, MH 136^9.

woruldbūend † m. _world-dweller_.

woruldcamp m. _secular warfare_, LL (388^4).

woruldcandel f. _sun_, B 1965.

woruldcearu (a^3) f. _worldly care_, Æ.

woruldcempa m. _earthly soldier_, Æ.

woruldcræft m. _secular art_, Æ.

woruldcund _worldly, secular_, CP. adv. -līce, CP.

woruldcyning † m. _earthly king_, Æ.

worulddǣd f. _worldly business_, LL (414^33).

worulddēad _dead_, #PPs# 142^4.

worulddēma m. _secular judge_, LL.

worulddōm m. _secular judgment_, Æ.

worulddrēam † m. _earthly joy_.

worulddrihten m. _lord of the world, God_, #Met# 29^1.

woruldduguð † f. _worldly riches_.

woruldearfoð † n. _earthly misery_.

woruldege m. _earthly fear_, LL (310^19).

woruldende m. _end of the world_, B 3083.

woruldfægernes f. _earthly beauty_, MH 34^8.

woruldfeoh n. _earthly goods, wealth_, #Gen# 2142.

woruldfolgað m. _worldly occupation_, #Bl#.

woruldfrætwung (world-) f. _worldly ornament_, #Bl# 125^36.

woruldfrēond (ȳ^3) m. _friend in this world_.

woruldfrið m. _worldly peace_, LL 220[1].

woruldfruma m. _primeval man, patriarch_, #Guth# 12^28.

woruldgālnes f. _lust of pleasure_, W 219^14.

woruldgebyrd n. _worldly origin or descent_, BH.

woruldgedāl n. _death_, #El# 581.

woruldgefeoht (o^2) n. _earthly fight_, MH 36^26.

woruldgeflit n. _dispute, law-suit_? #Lcd# 3·174^19.

woruldgerǣdnes (eo^1) f. _secular ordinance_, LL.

woruldgeriht n. _worldly justice, secular right or due_, LL 210[2,1].

woruldgerȳsnu np. _secular customs_, LL.

woruldgesǣlig _prosperous_, #Ma# 219.

woruldgesǣlða fp. _worldly fortune_, AO(o^2).

woruldgesceaft † f. _creature of this world_: _world_.

woruldgestrēon † n. _worldly riches_.

woruldgeswinc n. _earthly toil, misery_, CP(o^2).

woruldgeðincð f. _worldly honour, dignity_, GD, W.

woruldgeðōht (world-) mn. _worldly thought_, #Bl# 15^14.

woruldgewinn n. _earthly war_, Æ.

woruldgewritu np. _worldly literature, secular writings_.

woruldgewuna m. _customary law_, LL 206[1a].

woruldgielp (i^3) mn. _pride of this world, glory_, CP.

woruldgifu f. _worldly gift_.

woruldgītsere m. _coveter of worldly things_, #Met# 14^1.

woruldgītsung f. _covetousness_.

woruldglenge m. _worldly pomp_.

woruldgōd n. _worldly good_.

woruldgylp (Æ) = woruldgielp

woruldgyrla (o^2) m. _worldly garment_, NC 334.

woruldhād m. _secular state_, BH, GD.

woruldhlāford m. _secular lord_, CP.

woruldhlīsa m. _worldly fame_, Æ.

woruldhogu (world-) f. _worldly care_.

woruldhremming (o^2) f. ‘_impedimentum sæculi_,’ NC 334.

woruldhyht m. _earthly joy_, #Az# 136.

woruldlǣce m. _earthly physician_, Æ.

woruld-lagu f., -laga m. _civil law_.

woruldlēan n. _earthly reward_, LL (422^12).

woruldlic _earthly_, Æ: _worldly, secular_, Æ. adv. -līce.

woruldlīf n. _life in this world_.

woruldlufu f. _love of this world_, Æ.

woruldlust m. _worldly pleasure_, #Bo#.

woruldmǣg m. _earthly kinsman_, #Gen# 2178.

woruldman m. _human being, man of the world_, Æ, CP: _layman_.

woruldmēd f. _earthly reward_, LL (422^14).

woruldnēod f. _temporal need_, LL 267[32].

woruldnytt f. _worldly use or profit_.

woruldprȳdo f. _worldly pride_, #Lcd# 3·428. [v. ‘_pride_’]

woruldrǣden f. _way of the world_, B 1143 (v. MLN 25·113).

woruldrica m. _great man_, Æ.

woruldrīce I. n. _earthly kingdom_, CP: _world-realm, world_. II. adj.
_having worldly power or riches_.

woruldrīcetere (o^2) n. _worldly power_, NC 334.

woruldriht (y^3) n. _secular or civil law_: _God’s law for the world_.

woruldsacu f. _worldly strife_, W 170^9.

woruldsǣlða fp. _earthly blessings_, #Bo#.

woruldscamu (ea^3) f. _public disgrace_.

woruldsceaft † f. _earthly creature_.

woruldscēat m. _part of the world, region_.

woruldscēawung f. _worldly sight_, NC 334.

woruldscipe m. _worldly matter_, CP.

woruldscīr (world-) f. _life in the world (i.e. not monastic)_, _worldly
affairs, business_, GD 3^7.

woruldsnotor _worldly-wise_.

woruldsorg f. _earthly care_, CP.

woruldspēd f. _worldly wealth, success in the world_, CP.

woruldspēdig _rich in this world_, CP 333^2.

woruldsprǣc f. _worldly talk, conversation about worldly matters_, LL.

woruldstēor f. _secular penalty_, LL 258[51].

woruldstrang _having worldly power_, NC 334.

woruldstrengu f. _physical strength_, #Rd# 27^2.

woruldstrūdere m. _world-spoiler, spoliator, robber_.

woruldstund f. _life in this world, sojourn upon earth_, #El# 363.

woruldðearf f. _this world’s needs_, BH.

woruld-ðearf, -ðearfende _poor in worldly goods_.

woruldðearfa m. _poor man_, #PPs# 69^5.

woruldðēaw m. _worldly affair_, #Bo# 7^13.

woruld-ðegen, -ðegn, -ðēn m. _earthly or secular servant_, LL.

woruldðēnung (o^2) f. _secular office_, NC 334.

woruldðēostru (y^3) f. _earthly darkness_.

woruldðēowdōm m. _secular service_.

woruldðing (o^2) n. _worldly affair, thing_, Æ, AO, CP: _earthly
riches_.

woruldwǣpn (o^2) n. _earthly weapon_, #Bl# 213^4.

woruldwæter n. _ocean, sea_.

woruldwela m. _worldly wealth_, CP.

woruldwelig _rich in worldly goods_, NC 335.

woruldweorc n. _secular work_.

woruldweorðscipe m. _worldly honour_.

woruldwīdl n. _world-filth_, #Cr# 1007.

woruldwig n. _worldly contest_, LL.

woruldwilla m. _earthly good_, #Bo# 24^2.

woruldwilnung f. _earthly desire_, CP.

woruldwīs _worldly-wise_, CP(o^2).

woruldwīsdōm m. _worldly wisdom, science_, Æ.

woruldwīse f. _custom of the world_, MH 68^9#b#.

woruldwita m. _learned layman, philosopher_, LL.

woruldwīte n. _punishment on earth_: _civil punishment, fine_.

woruldwlenco f. _worldly magnificence, ostentation_, CP.

woruldwrenc m. _worldly cunning_, CP(o^2).

woruldwrītere m. _writer about the world, philosopher_.

woruldwuldor n. _worldly glory_.

woruldwuniende (o^2) _dwelling in the world_, #Met# 13^17.

woruldwynn f. _earthly joy_.

woruldyrmðu f. _earthly wretchedness_, AO.

wōrung f. _wandering, roving_, Æ, MFH 179.

wōs I. n. _sap, juice_, #Lcd#. II. gs. of wōh.

±wosa m. _conversation, intercourse_, DR.

wōsan (NG) = wēsan

wōsc pret. 3 sg., wōscon pret. pl. of wascan.

wōse = wāse  [[headword spelled “wase”]]

wōsig _juicy, moist_, #Lcd#.

-wost v. fore-w.

wōð † f. _sound, noise_: _voice, song, poetry_: _eloquence_.

wōðbora † m. _orator, speaker, seer, prophet, poet, singer_.

wōðcræft † m. _art of speech or song_.

-woðe v. got-w.

wōðgiefu f. _gift of song_, #Rd# 32^8.

wōðsong m. _song_, #Cr# 46.

wōum dp. of wōh, adj.

wōx I. pret. 3 sg. of weaxan. II. = wōsc

wracian _to be banished, be in exile_.

wraclīce = wræclīce

wracnian = wræcnian

wraco = wracu

wracu (e) f. (g. often wræce) _revenge, vengeance, persecution_, Æ, AO,
CP. on ðā wrace _in retaliation_: _punishment, penalty_, AO, CP:
_cruelty, misery, distress, torture, pain_, AO. [wrecan]

wræc I. (e) n(f?) _misery_, CP: _vengeance, persecution_: _exile_.
[‘_wreck_’; wrecan] II. _what is driven_, OET 37^62. III. pret. 3 sg. of
wrecan. IV. = wærc (A; v. JAW 52)

wræca = wræcca

wræcan = wrecan

wræcca (e) m. ‘_wretch_,’ CP: _fugitive, outcast, exile_, AO:
_adventurer, stranger_.

wræccan = wrecan

wræce v. wracu.

wræcend = wrecend

wræcfæc n. _time of exile, banishment, misery_, #Rim# 64.

wræcful _wretched, miserable_, Æ.

wrǣchwīl f. _period of exile or of distress_, #Ph# 527.

wræclāst † (e) m. _path of exile_.

wræclāstian _to banish_, WW.

wræclic adj. _foreign_: _strange, unfamiliar, extraordinary_: _wretched,
exiled_. adv. -līce.

wrǣclic = wrǣtlic

wræc-mæcg †, -mæcga ‡ m. _exile, outcast, miserable man_.

wræcmon m. _fugitive_, #Ex# 137.

wrǣcnan = wrǣcnian  [[headword spelled “wræcnian”]]

wræcnes = wrecnes

wræcnian (e) _to be banished, wander travel_, Æ.

wrǣcon pret. pl. of wrecan.

wræcscipe (e) m. _exile_.

wræcsetl n. _place of exile_, #Gu# 267.

wræcsīð m. _journey of exile or peril, pilgrimage_, Æ: _exile,
persecution_, Æ, AO: _misery_.

wræcsīðian _to wander, travel abroad, be in exile_, Æ.

wræcstōw f. _place of exile or punishment_.

wræcwīte n. _punishment_, #Bl#.

wrǣcworuld f. _miserable world_, W 1^2.

wrǣd f. _band, bandage, ‘wreath,’_ CP: _bundle_: _band, flock_. [wrīðan]

wrǣdmǣlum adv. _in companies_, WW 411^42.

-wrǣdnes v. sam-w.

wrǣg- = wrēg-

wrǣne (ē) _unbridled, loose, lustful_, AO.

wrænna (Æ) = wrenna

wrǣnnes f. _luxury, lust, wantonness_, AO, CP.

wrǣnsa m. _wantonness_, OEG 2347.

wrǣnscipe m. _wantonness_, OEG 5290 (ē).

wrǣnsian _to be wanton_, NC 335.

wrǣsnan _to alter, change, modulate_, #Rd# 25^1.

wrǣst (ā) _firm, able, strong, excellent_: _delicate_. adv. -e.

wrǣstan I. (±) _to ‘wrest,’ bend, twist, twang_. II. _to be or make
elegant_? WW.

wrǣstlere m. _wrestler_, WW 431^26.

wrǣstlic I. _pertaining to wrestling_, WW. II. (ā) _delicate,
elegant_, WW.

wrǣstliend _wrestler_, WW 431^25. [wrǣstan]

wrǣstlung f. _wrestling, struggling_, GD, OEG.

wræt m. = wrætte f.

wrǣt = wrǣtt

wrǣtlic _artistic, ornamental_: _curious, wondrous, rare_. adv. -līce.
[wrǣtt]

wrǣtt † f. _ornament, work of art, jewel_.

wrætte f. _rubea tinctoria_? _crosswort_? _hellebore_? (A 30·248).

wrǣð I. = wrǣd. II. = wrǣððo

+wrǣðan _to be enraged_, #Lcd# 3·212^4.

wræðian = wreðian

wrǣðo = wrǣððo

wrǣð-studu, -stuðu (e) f. _column, pillar support_.

wrǣððo, wrǣð(ð)u (ā) f. _‘wrath,’ anger, indignation_, NG.

wrǣxlian = wrǣstlian  [[variant of “wrǣstan”]]

wrāh pret. 3 sg. of wrēon.

wrang I. n. _‘wrong,’ injustice_. [_ON._ rangr] II. pret. 3 sg. of
wringan. III. (o) = wranga

wranga (pr-) _hold of a ship_, WW.

wrangwīs _perverse_, OEG 1770.

wrāsen (ǣ) f. _band, tie, chain_.

wrāst == wrǣst

wrāt pret. 3 sg. of wrītan.

wrāð I. adj. _‘wroth,’ furious, angry, hostile_, AO: _terrible,
horrible_: _grievous, harsh, bitter, malignant, evil, cruel_. adv. -e.
II. f. _cruelty_: _hardship_. [wrīðan] III. = wrǣð. IV. pret. 3 sg. of
wrīðan.

+wrāðian (refl.) _to be angry_, _Chr_ 1070. [‘_iwrathe_’]

wrāðlic † _grievous, severe, bitter_. adv. -līce.

wrāðmōd † _angry_.

wrāðscræf n. _wretched hole, pit of misery, hell_, #Rd# 41^41.

wrāððo = wrǣððu  [[under “wrǣððo”]]

wraðu f. _prop, help, support, maintenance_.

wrāðum adv. _fiercely_.

+wraxl? _wrestling-place, gymnasium_, OEG 18b^68?

wraxlere m. _wrestler_, OEG.

wraxlian _to wrestle_, Æ.

wraxliende _wrestling, contending, striving_.

wraxlung f. _wrestling_, WW 150^8.

wrēah pret. 3 sg. of wrēon.

wrec == wræc

wrecan^5 (eo) _to drive, impel, push_: _expel, persecute_, CP: (±)
_‘wreak,’ revenge, avenge, punish_, AO: _press forward, advance_:
_fulfil, accomplish_: _utter, deliver, pronounce_.

wreccan = (1) weccan; (2) wrecan

-wrecel v. spor-w.

wrecend m. _avenger_.

wrecnes (æ) f. _vengeance_, NG.

wrecscip (æ?) ‘_actuaria_’? ES 43·336.

wrecu (#VPs#) = wracu

±wrēgan I. † _to excite, stir up_. II. _to accuse, impeach_, Æ. [wrōht]

wrēgend m. _accuser_.

wrēgendlic _accusative_, #ÆGr# 22^20.

wrēgere m. _accuser, informer_, Æ.

wrēgistre (ǣ) f. _female accuser_, ÆL 2^208.

wrēgung f. _accusation_, Æ.

wrēhte pret. 3 sg. of wrēgan.

wrehtend m. _instigator_, WW 420^29.

wrēhtend m. _accuser_, #KGl# 73^23.

wrēn- = wrǣn-

wrenc m. _wile, stratagem, trick, deceit_, AO: (†) _modulation, melody,
song_. [‘_wrench_’]

wrencan _to twist_: _spin intrigues, devise plots_, #Mod# 33.

wrenna (æ) m., wrenne f. _wren_, WW.

wreocan = wrecan

wreogan (M) = wrigon pret. pl. of wrēon.

wrēoh imperat. of wrēon.

±wrēon^1,2 _to cover, clothe, envelop, conceal, hide_: _protect,
defend_.

wrēotan = rēotan

wreotian = writian

wreotu nap. of writ.

wrēoð = wrǣð

wreoðenhilt _with twisted hilt_, B 1699. [= *wriðenhilt]

wreoðian = wreðian

wrēoðian = wrīdian

wretbasu ‘_rubeum_’ (?= wrǣtt- or wrætte- v. A 30·248).

±wreðian _to support, sustain, uphold_, CP.

wreðstudu = wræðstudu  [[headword spelled “wrǣðstudu”]]

wrīanne (N) = wrēonne gerund of wrēon I.

wricð, wriceð pres. 3 sg. of wrecan.

wrid m. _shoot, plant, bush_, #Lcd#; Mdf.

+wrid n. _thicket_? #Guth#.

wrīdan^1 _to grow, thrive, flourish_.

wriden pp. of (1) wrīdan; (2) wrīðan.

wrīdian _grow, flourish, spring up_. [wrīdan]

wriecð = wricð pres. 3 sg. of wrecan.

wriexl == wrixl

wrīgels mn. _covering, veil_.

wrigen pp., wrigon pret. pl. of wrēon.

wrigennes (gn-) f. _a covering_, #EPs# 60^5.

wrīgian † _to go, turn, twist, bend_: _strive, struggle, press forward,
endeavour, venture_.

wrīhst pres. 2 sg., wrīhð pres. 3 sg. of wrēon.

+wrinclian _to wind about_, KC 4·34^9.

+wring n. _liquor, drink_, WW 128^17.

wringan^3 _to ‘wring,’ twist_: (±) _squeeze, press out_, Æ.

wringe f. (_oil-_)_press_, GD 250^15.

wringhwǣg n? _strained whey_, LL 451[16].

+wrisc = +wrixl

wrislan = wrixlan

wrist f. _wrist_, LL 386[2].

±writ n. _writing_: (±) _book, treatise_: _scripture_, Æ: _‘writ’
(‘i-writ’) charter, document, deed_, _AO, Bl_: ‘_stilus_,’ GPH 402.

±wrītan^1 (ȳ) _to incise, engrave_, _‘write,’ draw_, Æ, AO, CP: _bestow
by writing_.

wrītbred n. _writing tablet_.

-wrīte v. wæter-w.

-writennes v. tō-w.

±wrītere m. _writer, scribe, author, portrayer, painter_, Æ, CP.

wrīteȳren (MH 146^12) = wrītīren

writian (eo) _to chirp, chatter_, v. OEG 37^3.

wrīting f. _writing_, #SPs# 44^2.

wrītingfeðer f. _pen_, #EPs# 44^3.

wrītingīsen n. _style, pen_, MH 146^12#c#.

wrītīren (y^2) n. _writing instrument, style_.

writseax n. _style, pen_, MtL p2^18.

writt- = wrīt-

wriða m. _band, thong, bridle_, Æ: _collar, ring_.

±wrīðan^1 (ȳ) I. _to twist, wrap, bind up, tie, fasten, fetter_.
[‘_writhe_’] II. = wrīdan

+wriðelian _to bind_? OEG 23^7?

wrīðels m. _band, fillet, bandage_, WW 411^17.

wrīðian = wrīdian

wrixendlic _mutual_, GD 2^7. adv. -līce _turn about, one by one, by
turns, in turn_.

wrixl f., wrixla m. _change, exchange, barter_, CP.

+wrixl, +wrixle n. _turn, change_: _exchange, purchase_: _requital_.

wrixlan (±) _to change, barter, exchange, reciprocate, lend_, AO.
wordum w. _converse_: (+) _recompense, requite_: (+) _obtain_.

wrixlian = wrixlan

+wrixlic _alternating_, OEG 2^135.

±wrixlung f. _exchange_: _loan_.

wroegan = wrēgan

wrogen pp. of wrēon.

wroht = worht pp. of wyrcan.

wrōht I. f. _blame, reproach, accusation, slander_: _fault, crime, sin,
injustice_, Æ: _strife, enmity, anger, contention, dispute_, AO, CP:
_hurt, injury, calamity, misery_. [wrēgan] II. m. _tale-bearer_, #ÆGr#
217^2.

wrōhtberend m. _accuser_.

wrōhtbora m. _accuser, monster_: _the devil_.

wrōhtdropa m. _bloodshed accompanied by crime_, #GnE# 196.

wrōhtgemǣne _pledged to punishment or revenge_.

wrōhtgeorn _contentious_, CP 357.

wrōhtgetēme n. _series of crimes_? (BT), #Gen# 45.

wrōhtian _to do harm_? HL 15^105.

wrōhtlāc n. _calumny_, W 160^5n.

wrōhtsāwere m. _sower of strife_, CP 359.

wrōhtscipe m. _crime_, #Gen# 1672.

wrōhtsmið † m. _worker of evil, evildoer_.

wrōhtspitel _slanderous_, #EGl#. [spittan]

wrōhtstæf † m. _accusation_, #El# 926: _injury_, #Rd# 72^12,14.

wrong (WW 201^35) = wrang II.

wrōt m. _snout, elephant’s trunk_, WW.

wrōtan^7 _to root up_, Æ.

wrugon pret. pl. of wrēon.

wrungen pp. of wringan.

wrycð pres. 3 sg. of wrecan.

wryhta = wyrhta

wrȳhð = wrihð pret. 3 sg. of wrēon.

+wrynded _founded (of a house)_, MtL 7^25.

wrȳt- = wrīt-

wrȳte (CM 56^83) = prȳte  [[under “prȳto”]]

wrȳðan = wrīðan

wucaðēn = wucðegn

wuce = wucu

wuc-dæg, wuce-, wicu- m. _week-day_, Æ.

wucðegn (i^1) m. _monk or priest appointed for a week’s duty, weekly
servant_.

wucðēnung f. _service for a week_.

wucu f. ‘_week_,’ AO, CP.

wucubōt f. _penance lasting a week_, LL (278^12).

wucweorc (i^1) n. _(compulsory) work for a week, by a tenant_.

wude == wudu

wudere m. _wood-man, wood-carrier_, WW 371^5.

wudewe = wuduwe

wudian _to cut wood_, Æ.

wudig _wooded, having trees_, #Az# 120.

wudigere, wudiere (WW) = wudere

wudiht _thick (with trees)_, _woody, forest-like_, GPH 402.

wudo- = wudu-

wudu m., gs. wuda, wudes; nap. wudas, wuda _‘wood,’ forest, grove_, Æ,
AO, CP; Mdf: _tree (the Cross)_: _wood, timber_, Æ, CP: (†) _ship_, B:
_spear-shaft_, B 398.

wuduælfen = wuduelfen

wuduæppel f. _wild apple, crab_, #Lcd# 71a.

wudubǣre _wood-bearing_, OEG 1806.

wudubærnett n. _burning of wood_, LL 16[12]; 24n^2.

wudubāt n. _wooden boat_, #An# 907.

wudubēam † m. _forest-tree_.

wudubearo m. _forest, grove_.

wudu-bend, -bind m. = wudubinde

wudubill n. _hatchet_, GD, WW.

wudubinde I. (-bindle) f. _woodbine, convolvulus_. II. f. _bundle of
sticks_, OET 35^18.

wudubior (= bora?) m. _wood carrier_, #HGl# 427.

wudublǣd † (-blēd) f. _forest blossom_.

wudubrūn n. _bugloss, ox-tongue_.

wudubucca m. _wild buck, wild goat_, #Lcd#.

wudubyrðra m. _camp-follower_, OEG 869.

wuducerfille f. _wood-chervil, cow-parsley_.

wuducocc m. _woodcock_, #Gl#.

wuducroft m. _a croft with trees on it_? (BT) KC 3·376^6.

wuduculfre m. _wood-pigeon_, WW.

wuducūnelle f. _wild thyme_, #Lcd#.

wuducynn n. _an aromatic_ (?) _wood_, JnL 12^3.

wududocce f. _wild dock, sorrel_, #Lcd#.

wuduelfen f. _wood-elf, dryad_, WW.

wudufæsten n. _place protected by woods, wood-fastness_: _ship_.

wudufeld m. _wooded plain_, #PPs# 131^6.

wudufeoh n. _forest-tax_, #Lcd#.

wudufille = wuducerfille

wudufīn f. _pile of wood_, #ÆGr#.

wudufugol m. _forest bird, wild fowl_.

wudugāt f. _wild goat_, #Lcd#.

wudugehæg n. _enclosed wood_? (BT), KC 3·176^1.

wuduhēawere m. _wood-cutter_, Æ.

wuduherpað m. _public path through a wood_, KC 3·213^2.

wuduhīewet n. _cutting of wood_, LL 567[37].

wuduholt n. _forest, wood, grove_.

wuduhona m. _woodcock_, WW 38^8.

wuduhrofe = wudurofe

wuduhunig n. _wild honey_, Æ.

wudulād f. _carting wood_, LL 452[21,4].

wudu-lǣs f., gs. -lǣswe _wood-pasture, run (for cattle) in a wood_, Ct.

wuduland n. _woodland_.

wudu-leahtric, -lectric m. _wood-lettuce, wild sleepwort_. #Lcd#.

wudulēswe = wudulǣswe  [[form of “wudulǣs”]]

wudulic adj. _woody, wooded_, Æ.

wudumǣr (ē^3) f. _wood-nymph, echo_, #Gl#.

wudumerce m. _wild parsley, wood-mint_.

wudurǣden f. _wood-regulation, right of estovers_, LL.

wudurēc m. _smoke from a funeral pyre_, B 3144.

wudurima m. _border of a wood_, KC 3·34^15.

wudurofe f. _woodruff_.

wudurose f. _wild rose_, #Lcd# 34b?

wudusnīte f. _wood-snipe, thistle-finch_? WW.

wudusūræppel f. _crab-apple_? #Lcd# 160a.

wudutelga ‡ m. _twig or branch of a tree_.

wudutrēow n. _forest tree_.

wuduðistle m. _wood-thistle_, #Lcd#.

wuduwa (wyde-) m. _widower_.

wuduwald m. _forest_, WW 426^35.

wuduwanhād m. _state of a woman who has not a husband, chastity,
widowhood_, CP.

wuduwāsa m. _faun, satyr_.

wuduwe (i, eo, y^1; e^2) f. ‘_widow_.’

wuduweard m. _forester_, LL 452[19].

wudu-weax n., -weaxe f. _wood-waxen, genista tinctoria_, #Lcd#.

wuduwēsten mn. _wild forest_.

wuduwinde f. _woodbine_, #Gl#.

wuduwyrt f. _plant which grows in woods_, #Bl# 59^3.

wudwe = wuduwe

wuhhung f. _rage, fury, madness_: (pl.) _the Furies_.

wuht AO, CP = wiht

wuhung = wuhhung

wul == wull

wulder = wuldor

wuldor n. _glory, splendour, honour_, Æ, CP: _praise, thanks_: _heaven_,
#El#.

wuldor-bēag, -bēah m. _crown of glory_, Æ.

±wuldorbēagian _to crown_, Æ.

wuldorblǣd m. _glorious success_, #Jud# 156.

wuldorcyning m. † _glorious king, King of Glory, God_.

wuldordrēam † m. _heavenly rapture_.

Wuldorfæder † m. _Glorious Father, Father of Glory_.

wuldorfæst _glorious_. adv. -fæste, -fæstlīce.

wuldorfæstlicnes f. _glory_, Æ.

wuldorful _glorious_, Æ: _vainglorious_.

wuldorfullian _to glorify_, Æ.

wuldorfullīce adv. _gloriously_, Æ.

wuldorgāst m. _angel_, #Gen# 2912.

wuldorgeflogena m. _one who has fled from glory, devil_, #Lcd# 3·36^15.

wuldorgesteald † np. _glorious dwellings, realms of glory_.

wuldorgeweorc n. _wondrous work_, ES 43·167.

wuldorgifu † (eo) f. _glorious gift, grace_.

wuldorgim m. _glorious jewel, sun_, #Rd# 81^20.

wuldorhama † (o^3) m. _garb of glory_.

wuldorhēap m? _glorious troop_, NC 335.

wuldorhelm m. _crown of glory_, #Bl#.

wuldorlēan † n. _glorious reward_.

wuldorlic _glorious_. adv. -līce.

wuldormāga m. _heir of heaven_, #Gu# 1067.

wuldormago m. _heir of heaven_, #Gu# 1267.

wuldormicel _gloriously great_, †Hy 7^94.

wuldornytting f. _glorious service_, #Rd# 81^19.

wuldorsang m. _glorious song_, MFH 114^10.

wuldorspēd f. _glorious wealth_, #Gen# 87.

wuldorspēdig _glorious_, #An# 428.

wuldortān m. _plant with medicinal virtues_? (BT), #Lcd# 3·34.

wuldortorht † _gloriously bright, clear, brilliant, illustrious_.

wuldorðrymm m. _heavenly glory_.

wuldorweorud n. _heavenly host_, #Cr# 285.

wuldorword n. _glorious word_, †Hy 7^46.

wuldrian (±) _to glorify, praise, extol_, Æ: _boast, brag_, Æ: _live in
glory_, Æ.

wuldrig _glorious_, DR.

wuldrung f. _glorying, boasting_.

wuldur == wuldor

wulf m. (_he-_)‘_wolf_,’ Æ, AO, CP; Mdf: _wolfish person, devil_.

wulfescamb m. _wild teasel_.

wulfesfīst m. _bullfist, toadstool (plant)_.

wulfhaga m. _shelter from wolves_? CC 53.

wulfhēafodtrēo m. _cross, gallows_? #Rd# 56^12.

wulfheort † _wolf-hearted, cruel_.

wulf-hlið n., nap. -hleoðu _hillside inhabited by wolves_, B 1358.

wulfhol n. _wolf’s hole_, WW.

wulflȳs n. _fleece of wool_, WW 198^26.

wulfmod = wullmod

wulfsēað m. _wolf’s hole_, KC 3·264^5.

wulfslǣd n. _valley of wolves_, KC 3·456^6.

wull f. ‘_wool_,’ Æ.

wullcamb m. _comb for wool_, LL 454[15,1].

wullcnoppa (? hn-) m. _tuft of wool_, WW.

wulle = wull

wullen = wyllen

wullian _to wipe with wool_, #Lcd# 1·356^23.

wullic _woolly, hairy_.

wullmod m? _distaff_.

wulltewestre f. _wool-carder_, #Lcd#.

wulluc _cover, wrapper_, A 31·65.

wullwǣga f. _scales for wool_, WW 148^21.

+wun = +wuna

±wuna I. m. (usu. +) _habit, custom, practice, rite_, _Bo_; Æ. on gew.
habban _to be accustomed to_. [‘_i-wune_’] II. (+ only) _wonted,
customary, usual_.

wund I. f. _‘wound,’ sore, ulcer_, Æ, CP: _wounding, injury_, Æ. II.
adj. _wounded, sore_, AO.

wundel f. _wound_, LL, RB.

wundelīce = wundorlīce

wunden pp. of windan.

wundenfeax _with twisted mane_, B 1400.

wundenhals _with twisted prow_, B 298.

wundenlocc † _with braided locks_.

wundenmǣl _etched, damascened (of a sword)_, B 1531.

wundenstefna m. _ship with curved or wreathed prow_, B 220.

wunder = wundor

±wundian _to wound_, Æ, AO, CP.

wundiend ‘_vulnerator_,’ ERHy 6^42.

wundiht, wundig _ulcerous, full of sores_.

wundle = wundel

wundlic _wounding, wound-inflicting_, GPH 402^51.

wundon pret. pl. of windan.

wundor (often confused with wuldor) n. (gs. wundres) _‘wonder,’ miracle,
marvel, portent, horror_, Æ, AO, CP: _wondrous thing, monster_.

wundoragræfen ‡ _wondrously engraven_.

wundorbēacen n. _strange sign_.

wundorbebod n. _strange order_, B 1747.

wundorblēo n. _wondrous hue_, #Cr# 1140.

wundorclam n. _strange bond_, #Cr# 310.

wundor-clofe, -clufe f. _camphire (plant)_.

wundorcræft † m. _wondrous skill, miraculous power_.

wundorcræftiglīce _with wondrous skill_, BH 324^3#o#.

wundordǣd f. _wondrous deed_, #Bl#.

wundordēað m. _wondrous death_, B 3037.

wundorfæt (e^2) n. _wondrous vessel_, B 1162.

wundorful _wonderful_, Æ. adv. -līce.

wundorgehwyrft (e^4) _wonderful turn_, GPH 390.

wundorgeweorc = wundorweorc

wundorgiefu f. _wondrous endowment_, #Wy# 72.

wundorhǣlo (u^2) f. _wondrous healing_, BH 446^12.

wundorhūs? n. _‘solarium,’ upper room_, GD 119^26.

±wundor-lǣcan, -līcian _to make wonderful, magnify_.

wundorlic _wonderful, remarkable, strange_, Æ, AO, CP. adv. -līce.

wundormāðm ‡ m. _wonderful treasure_.

wundorsēon f. _wonderful sight_, B 995.

wundorsmið m. _skilled smith_, B 1681.

wundortācen n. _wondrous sign_, #PPs# 104^23.

wundorweorc n. _wonderful work, miracle_.

wundorworuld f. _wonderful world_, #Rd# 40^17.

wundorwyrd f. _wonderful event_, #El# 1071.

wundres v. wundor.

±wundrian (w. g.) _to wonder, be astonished (at)_, _marvel_, Æ, AO, CP:
_admire_: _make wonderful, magnify_. [_Ger._ wundern]

wundrum adv. (d. of wundor) _wonderfully, strangely, terribly_.

wundrung f. _wonder, astonishment, admiration_, Æ: _spectacle_, OEG
4370.

wundswaðu (e) f. _scar_, #VPs# 37^6.

wundur == wundor

wundwīte n. _compensation for wounding_, LL 76#h#.

+wunelic _usual, customary_, Æ, CP. adv. -līce, _BH_. [‘_i-wuneliche_’]

wunenes, wununes f. _dwelling, habitation_: _perseverance_, DR. [wunian]

wungynde = wuniende pres. ptc. of wunian.

wunian (±) _to inhabit, dwell, abide, exist_, Æ, AO, CP: (+) _remain,
continue, stand_, Æ, AO, CP: (±) _be used to, be wont to_: (+)
_habituate oneself to_, CP 73^14. [_Ger._ wohnen]

wunigend m. _inhabitant_, #RBl# 5^11.

+wunlic = +wunelic

wunn = wynn

wunnen pp., wunnon pret. pl., of winnan.

wunones = wunenes

wunsum = wynsum

wununes = wunenes

wunung f. _act of dwelling, living_, RB 108^3: _dwelling,
habitation_, Æ.

wunungstōw f. _abiding-place_, GD 31^19.

wuraðo (N) = wrǣððo

wurcan = wyrcan

wurd == (1) wyrd; (2) word

wurdon pret. pl. of weorðan.

wurht, wurhton = worhte pret. sg., worhton pret. pl., of wyrcan.

wurm == wyrm

wurma m., wurme f. _murex, purple-fish_: _any dye, woad, purple_: _a
plant used for dyeing_.

wur-mille, -mele f. _wild marjoram_, #Gl#.

wurms = worms

wurnian = weornian

wurpan = weorpan

wurpul _that which throws down_, #Gl#.

wursm = worms

wurst = wierrest

wurt == wyrt

wurð == weorð

wurðe == weorð(e), wierðe

wurðig = worðig

wūscbearn n. _(dear) little child_, JnL 13^32. [wȳscan]

wūso (JnR 13^33) = wūscbearn

wussung = wissung

wuta = wita

wutan = wuton

wutedlīce, wutodlīce (NG) = witodlīce

wuton 1 pers. pl. subj. of wītan _to go_. used to introduce an
imperative or hortatory clause _let us...! come!_ CP.

wutu (M), wutum, wutun (N) = wuton

wutudlīce = witodlīce

wūðwuta (DR) = ūðwita

wȳc == wīc

wyc- = wic-

wȳd = wīd

wyd- = wud-

wyder- = wiðer-

wȳf- = wīf-

wyglere = wiglere

wyht = wiht

wyhtel f. _quail_. [_Ger._ wachtel]

wyl- = weal-, wel-, wi(e)l-

wȳl- = wīel-

wylcð pres. 3 sg. of wealcan.

wylf f. _she-wolf_.

wylfen I. adj. _wolfish_. II. f. _she-wolf, fury_, #Gl#.

wȳliscmoru = wēalmoru  [[redirected to “wealhmoru”]]

wyll f. _wool_, LL (166n^4).

wyllen (i) _made of wool, woollen_.

wyloc = weoloc

wyn = wynn

wȳn- = wīn-

wynbēam m. _tree of gladness, holy cross_, #El# 844.

wynblis f. _joy_, GD 2^4.

wynburh f. _delightful town_, #PPs# 127^2.

wyncondel f. _pleasant light, sun_, #Gu# 1186.

wyndæg † m. _day of gladness_.

+wynde n. _weaving_, #Gl#.

wyndecræft m. _art of embroidery_, #Gl#.

wyndle f. _wound_, LL 381[23].

wyndrēam m. _jubilation_.

wyndrēamnes f. _jubilation_, #LPs# 150^5.

wyndrian = wundrian

wyne == wine

wynele m. _gladdening oil_, #PPs# 108^18.

wynfæst (e) _joyful_.

wynful _full of bliss, joyful_.

wyngesið m. _pleasant companion_, #PPs# 100^3.

wyngrāf mn. _delightful grove_, #PPs# 94^13.

wynigað (M) = wunigað pres. pl. of wunian.

wynland † (o^2) n. _land of delight_.

wynlēas † _joyless_.

wynlic _pleasant, beautiful, joyful_. adv. -līce.

wynlust m. _sensual pleasure_, Æ.

wynmǣg f. _winsome maiden_, #Gu# 1319.

wynn f. (occl. late as. wyn) _joy, rapture, pleasure, delight,
gladness_, AO [wine]

wynn- v. also wyn-, win(n)-.

wynnum _joyfully, beautifully_. [wynn]

wynpsalterium n. _psalm of joy_, #PPs# 56^10.

wynrōd f. _blessed cross_, #Sol# 235.

wynsang m. _joyful song_, W 265^31.

wynstaðol m. _joyous foundation_, #Rd# 92^3.

wynsum (e, i; once +wuns-) _‘winsome,’ pleasant, delightful, joyful,
merry_, Æ, CP.

+wynsumian _to rejoice, exult_, DR.

±wynsumlic adj. _pleasant, delightful_. adv. -līce _pleasantly,
happily_, Æ.

wynsumnes (i) f. _loveliness, pleasantness, rejoicing_, Æ.

wynwerod n. _‘chorus,’ joyous band_, #Gl#.

wynwyrt f. _pleasant plant_, DD 5.

wynyng = wining

wyorðmynd (#Bl#) = weorðmynd

wȳr == wīr

wyrc == weorc

wyrcan (e, eo, i) _to prepare, perform, do, make_, _‘work,’ construct,
produce, effect_, Æ, AO, CP. ēastron w. _to keep Easter, eat the
passover_: _amount to_: (w. g.) _strive, after_: _deserve gain, win,
acquire_.

+wyrce n. _chitterlings (of pig)_.

wyrcend m. _worker, doer_, Æ.

wyrcnes f. _work, operation_, BH.

wyrcta (Ep, MtL) = wyrhta

wyrcung f. _working, work_, DR.

±wyrd f. (m? n?) _fate, chance, fortune, destiny_, Æ, AO: _Fate,
Providence_: _event, phenomenon, transaction, fact_: (+) _condition_.
[‘_wierd_’; weorðan]

wyrdan = wierdan

+wyrde I. n. _speech, conversation_: _eloquence, verbosity_:
_ordinance_. II. = +wyrðe

+wyrdelic _historical, authentic_, Æ. adv. -līce _eloquently_:
_accurately, verbatim_: _wisely_, OEG 208.

+wyrdelicnes f. _eloquence_, A 13·38^1321.

wyrdgesceapum _by chance_, WW 400^25.

+wyrdignes f. _eloquence_, OEG 5488.

+wyrdlian = +wierdan

wyrdnes f. _condition, state_, #Bo# 128n.

wyrdstæf m. _decree of fate_, #Gu# 1325.

wyrdwrītere m. _historian, chronicler_, Æ.

wyred = werod

wyregung = wyrgung

wyrest = wierrest

wyrfan = hwierfan

wyrg = wearg

wyrg- = werg-, wirg-, wyrig-

wyrgan I. _to strangle_, Æ. [‘_worry_’] II. = wiergan

wyrgcwedol (e) _ill-tongued, given to cursing_.

wyrgcwedolian _to curse_, #VPs# (e).

wyrgcwedolnes (e^1, i^2) f. _cursing_, #Ps#.

wyrgcweðan (e) _to curse_.

wyrged (æ) _the devil_, NG.

-wyrgednes v. ā-w.

wȳrgels = wrīgels

wyrgend (e) m. _reviler, evildoer_.

wyrgende _given to cursing_, W 70^18.

wyrgðu (æ, e) f. _curse, condemnation, punishment_: _evil, wickedness_.

wyrgung (e) f. _curse, cursing, condemnation, banishment_, Æ.

+wyrht (eo) fn. _work, deed, service_: _desert, merit_, AO, CP. mid
gewyrhtum _deservedly_: _transgression_: (†) _decree of fate_?

wyrhta m. _‘wright,’ artist, labourer, worker, maker, creator_, Æ, CP:
(+) _fellow-worker_: (+) _accomplice_.

wyri- = wearg-, wyrig-

wyrian = wiergan

wyricean = wyrcan

wyrig = werig

wyrig- = wearg-, wyrg-

wyrignes f. _abuse, cursing_.

wyrld = woruld

wyrm (eo, o, u) I. m. _reptile, serpent, snake, dragon_, Æ, AO: _‘worm,’
insect, mite_. [wurma] II. = wearm

wyrma = wurma

wyrmǣt = wyrmǣte (I.)

wyrmǣte I. f. _attack of worms, worm-eaten state_, A, #Lcd#. II. adj.
_worm-eaten_, #Lcd#.

±wyrman (æ, e, i) _to warm, make warm_.

wyrmbaso _red, scarlet_, OET 113^67.

wyrmcynn n. _serpent-kind, sort of serpent_, Æ, AO.

wyrmella = wurmille

wyrmfāh _adorned with figures of snakes, damascened_? B 1698.

wyrm-galdere, -galere (u) m. _snake-charmer_, Æ.

wyrmgealdor n. _a charm, against serpents_? #Lcd# 148a.

wyrmgeard m. _abode of serpents_, #Sol# 469.

wyrmgeblǣd n. _swelling from snake-bite_? #Lcd# 162b.

wyrmhǣlsere m. _diviner by serpents_, WW 441^35.

wyrmhīw n. _likeness of a serpent_, ÆL 10^104.

wyrmhord n. _dragon’s hoard_, B 2222.

wyrmlīc n. _form of a serpent_.

wyrmmelu n. _worm-meal_, ‘_pulvis e vermibus confectus_,’ #Lcd#.

wyrmrēad (u^1) _purple, scarlet_, Æ.

wyrms nm. _virus, corrupt matter_, Æ.

±wyrmsan _to fester_, CP.

+wyrmsed _purulent_.

wyrmsele m. _hall of serpents, hell_, #Jud# 119.

wyrmshrǣcing f. _spitting up of matter_, WW 113^8?

wyrmsig (u) _purulent_, WW.

wyrmslite m. _snake-bite_, W 188^1.

wyrmsūtspīung f. _spitting up of matter_, WW 113^8?

wyrmwyrt f. _worm-wort_, #Lcd#.

wyrn = wearn

wyrnan = wiernan

wyrp m. _a throw, cast_, Lk 22^41.

wyrpan = wierpan

wyrpe (= ie) m. _revolution, change, recovery, relief, improvement_.
[weorpan]

+wyrpe n. _heap_? KC 5·78^29; Mdf.

wyrpel m. _jess (in falconry)_, #Wy# 87 (v. ES 37·195).

-wyrplic v. scort-w.

wyrpst, wyrpð pres. 2 and 3 sg. of weorpan and wyrpan.

wyrrest = wierrest

wyrs == wiers

wyrshrǣcung = wyrmshrǣcing

wyrsman = wyrmsan

wyrst = (1) wrist; (2) wierrest

wyrt (e, i) f. _herb, vegetable, plant, spice_, AO, CP: _crop_: _root_.
[‘_wort_’]

wyrtbedd m. _bed of herbs_, #Lcd#.

+wyrtbox f. _herb or perfume box_.

wyrtbrǣð m. _fragrance_, Æ.

wyrtcynn n. _species of plant_.

wyrtcynren n. _the vegetable world_, #LPs# 146^8.

wyrtdrenc m. _herbal drink, medicine_.

wyrteceddrenc m. _herbal acid drink_, #Lcd# 63b.

wyrtfæt n. _scent-bottle_, OEG.

wyrtforbor n. _restraint from action by the operation of herbs_ (BT),
#Lcd# 111b.

wyrtgælstre f. _witch who works with herbs_, #Lcd# 3·186^11.

wyrtgeard m. _(kitchen) garden_, #CPs# 143^13.

wyrt-gemang (Æ) n., -gemengnes f. _mixture of herbs, spices, perfume_.

wyrtgyrd = wyrtgeard

±wyrtian _to season, spice, perfume_.

wyrtig _garden-like_? _full of herbs_? ÆL 30^312.

wyrtmete m. _dish of herbs, pottage_, WW.

wyrt-rum, wyrt-(t)ruma m., -rume f. _root, root-stock_, CP: _origin,
beginning, stock_. [v. CC 68]

wyrtrumian _to take root_: (+) _root out_, DR.

wyrttūn, ±wyrtūn (Æ) m. _garden_.

wyrttūnhege f. _garden enclosure_, GD 67^18.

wyrtung f. a preparation of herbs, #Lcd# 1·342^25.

wyrtwala (i, eo, u^1; æ, e^2) m. _root, stock, base_.

wyrtwalian (æ^2) _to set, plant, root_: _root up_, #ÆGr#.

wyrtwalu f. = wyrtwala

wyrtweard m. _gardener_, GD 23; Jn 20^15.

wyrtwela = wyrtwala

wyrð == weorð

wyrðan _to irrigate with manure_, A 36·77.

+wyrðan I. (= ie) _to value, appraise_. II. = +weorðan

wyrðe = weorð

+wyrðe (= ie) n. _bulk, contents, amount_, #Lcd#.

wyrðeland = yrðland

wyrðig I. _fitting, deserved_, AO 256^11. II. = worðig

wyrðing m. _fallow land_? _cultivated land_? WW 495^20.

wyruld- = woruld-

wys- = wis(s)-

wȳscan (ī) (w. d. pers. and g. thing) _to ‘wish,’_ Æ, AO, CP: _adopt_.

+wȳscednes f. _adoption_, RBL 11^14.

+wȳscendlic _desirable_, CM 109: _optative (mood)_, #ÆGr#. adv. -līce.

+wȳscing (ī) f. _adoption_, RB 10^2.

wȳsdōm (Æ) = wīsdōm

wyt = wit pron.

wyt- = wit-

wȳt- = wīt-

wytt = wit pron.

wytuma m. _paranymph_, A 13·30^82. [= witumbora? (BT)]

wyð- = wið-

wyxð pres. 3 sg. of weaxan.




=Y=


ybilberende (OEG 53^16) = yfelberende

ȳcan, ȳcean = īecan

yce f. _‘parruca,’ a kind of bird_, WW 468^22 (v. ANS 119·434).

ȳce (ī) fm. _toad, frog_.

ȳcte pret. 3 sg. of ȳcan.

ȳdæges = īdæges

ȳddisc n? _household stuff, furniture, possessions_, Æ. [ēad]

ȳde = ēode

ȳdel == īdel

ydes = ides

ȳdisc = ȳddisc

ȳdl- = īdl-

yfæsdrype = yfesdrype

yfel I. adj. gsm. yfel(e)s _bad, ill_, _Bl, Lcd, Mt_: _‘evil,’ wicked,
wretched_, _Bl, CP, Mt_. comp. wiersa, wyrsa _worse_. superl.
wierrest(a), wiersta, weorsta, wyr(re)sta _worst_, Æ, AO. II. n.
_‘evil,’ ill, wickedness, misery_, _B, Bl, CP, G, VPs_.

yfelādl f. _‘cachexia,’ consumption_, WW 113^13.

yfelberende (ybil-) _bringer of evil tidings_, OEG 53^16 (v. ANS
85·310).

yfelcund _evil, malignant_, #LPs#.

yfelcwedolian (ð) _to speak evil_, #ERPs# 36^22.

yfel-cweðende, -cweðelgiende (#EPs#) _evil-speaking_, #SPs# 36^23.

yfeldǣd f. _ill deed, injury_, Æ.

yfeldǣda m. _evildoer_, Æ.

yfeldǣde _evil-doing_.

yfeldēma m. _wicked judge_, NC 335.

yfeldōnd m. _evildoer_, JnL 18^30.

yfeldōnde _evil-doing_, LL (424^20).

yfeldysig ‘_stultomalus_,’ WW 165^18.

yfele = yfle

yfelful _malicious, wicked_, A 11·116^13.

yfelgiornes f. _malice, wickedness_, DR.

±yfelian _to inflict evil, hurt, wrong, injure_, _Ps_: _become bad, grow
worse, suffer_, _W_. [‘_evil_’]

yfelic, yfellic _evil, bad, foul, ugly_. adv. -līce.

yfellærrende _persuading to evil_, GPH 390.

yfelnes f. _wickedness, depravity_, _Æ_; CP. [‘_evilness_’]

yfelsacend m. _blasphemer_ (eoful-).

±yfelsacian _to blaspheme_, #Bl# 189; GD 289.

yfelsacung f. _calumny, blasphemy_.

yfelsæc (eoful-) n? _blasphemy_, #El# 524.

±yfelsian (ebol-) _to blaspheme_.

yfel-sprǣce, -sprecende _evil-speaking_.

yfelsung (ebol-) f. _blasphemy_.

yfeltihtend m. _inciter to evil_, Æ.

yfeltihtende _inciting to evil_, Æ.

yfelwillende _vicious_, Æ, CP.

yfelwillendnes f. _malice_, #LPs#.

yfelwilnian _to desire evil_, #LPs#.

yfelwoerc n. _evil deed_, DR 103^1.

yfelwyrcende _evil-doing_, Æ.

yfelwyrde _evil-speaking_, ES 39·354.

yfemest superl. adj. _highest, uppermost_, CP. [ufan]

yfera = yferra

yferdrype = yfesdrype

yferra comp. adj. _after, subsequent_: _higher_. [ufan]

yfes f. = efes

yfesdrype (æ^2) m. ‘_eaves-drop_,’ _EC_ 141^16.

ȳfig = īfig

yfle adv. (comp. wirs) _evilly, badly, ill, wrongly, miserably_, _G,
Ps_. [‘_evil_’]

±yflian = yfelian

yflung f. _injury_, GD 197^12.

yfmest = yfemest

ygett = iggað

ȳgland = īgland

ȳgðelīce = īeðelīce

ȳhte = īhte

ȳl = īl

ylca (Æ) = ilca

ylcian = elcian

yld == ield

yle = ile

ylf = ælf

ylfe = ielfe

ylfet, ylfetu, ylfette (Æ) = ilfetu

ylful (#HGl# 529) = ieldful

ylp m. _elephant_, WW; Æ. [‘_elp_’]

ylpen (i) _of an elephant_.

ylpen- = elpen(d)-

ylpesbān = elpendbān

yltsta = ieldesta wk. masc. superl. of eald.

yltwist f? _catching of birds_, WW 351^6.

ym- = ymb-, ymbe-

ymb = ymbe

ymbærnan _to travel round_, BH 28^8.

ymbbegang = ymbgang

ymbbeorgan^3 _to shield, defend_.

ymbberan^4 _to surround_.

ymbbīgnes (bebīg-) f. _bending round, bend, circuit, sweep (of a
river)_, BH 424^10. [bīegan]

ymbbindan^3 _to bind round_, MkL 9^42.

ymbbūgan^2 _to bend round_.

ymbcæfian _to embroider round, bedeck_.

ymbceorfan^3 _to circumcise_, NG.

ymbceorfnes f. _circumcision_, JnR 7^23 (-cernes).

ymbcerr (= ie) m. _turning about, going, migration_, NG:
_tergiversation, trickery_, DR.

ymbcerran = ymbcyrran

ymbclyccan _to enclose_, #RPs# 16^10 (v. ES 38·25).

ymbclyppan (i) _to embrace, clasp_, Æ.

ymbclypping f. _embracing_, OEG 4529 (emc-).

ymbcyme m. _assembly, convention_, LL 12 (ymc-).

ymbcyrran (e^2) _to turn round, go round, make the circuit of_:
_overturn, change_, NG.

ymbdringend = ymbhringend

ymbe I. prep. w. a. d. and adv. (of place) _around, about, at, upon,
near, along_, †_Chr_: (of time) _about, at, after, before_. ymb utan
_about, by, around_: (causal, etc.) _about, in regard to, concerning, on
account of, owing to_. ðæs y. lītel _soon after_. y. bēon _to set about
a thing_. [‘_embe_’] II. n. _swarm of bees_, #Lcd# 1·384^17; Mdf.

ymbe- = ymb-

ymbeaht mp. ‘_collatio_,’ WW; OEG 53^22 (v. ES 11·492).

ymbeardian _to dwell round_, #VPs# 30^14.

ymbebǣtan _to curb, restrain_, #Met# 24^37.

ymbebēgnes = ymbbīgnes

ymbeornan = ymbiernan

ymbesprǣc f. _conversation, comment, remark, criticism_, Æ.

ymbe-ðanc, -ðonc, -ðanca m. _thought, reflection_, CP.

ymbeðencan = ymbðencan

ymbeðridian _to deliberate, think about_, NC 335.

ymb-fær (embef-) n., -færeld (Æ) nm. _journey round, circuit_.

ymbfæstnes f. _enclosure_, DR.

ymbfæstnung f. _monument, tomb_, JnL 19^41.

ymbfæðmian _to embrace_.

ymbfaran^6 _to surround_, AO 80^26: _travel round_, GD 490^3.

ymbfeng I. m. _envelope, cover_, OEG 468. II. pres. 3 sg. of ymbfōn.

ymbfēran _to go about, journey round_, A 4·156; GPH 396.

ymbflēogan^2 _to fly around_.

ymbfōn^7 _to surround, encompass, embrace, grasp, seize_, AO.

ymbfrætewian _to decorate, surround with adornment_.

ymb-gan anv., -gangan^7 _to go round, surround_.

ymbgang (eo^2) m. _going about, circuit, circumference, surrounding
belt_, AO.

ymbgearwian _to clothe, dress_, NG.

ymbgedelf n. _digging round_, ÆH 2·408^11.

ymb-gefrætwian, -gefretwian (#VPs#) = ymbfrætewian

ymbgeong (N) = ymbgang

ymbgeoting? f. _pouring round_, OEG (in-, yn-).

ymbgerēnian _to adorn or deck round_, #BlPs# 143^15.

ymb-gesett, -geseten _neighbouring_, BH 2·362.

ymbgesettan = ymbsettan

ymbgirdan = ymbgyrdan

ymbgong == ymbgang

ymbgyrdan (i) _to gird about, encircle, surround_, Æ.

ymbhabban _to surround_, AO: _include, contain_.

ymbhaga m. _enclosure for bees_, #Lcd# 1·395^4. [ymbe II.]

ymbhaldan = ymbhealdan

ymbhammen _surrounded, covered_, WW 340^14.

ymbhangen pp. of ymbhōn.

ymbhealdan^7 _to encompass_, #Sat# 7.

ymbhēapian _to heap round, crowd about_, WW.

ymbhēdig = ymbhȳdig

ymbhegian _to hedge round_, Æ.

ymbhēpan = ymbhȳpan

ymbhīwan (WW 381^2) = ymbhȳpan

ymbhlennan (emb-) _to surround_, OEG 24.

ymbhoga m. _care, anxiety, solicitude, consideration_, CP.

ymbhogian _to be anxious about_, #LPs#.

ymbhōn^7 _to surround, deck, clothe_.

ymb-hringan _to surround, fence round_, CP: _wind round_, WW.

ymbhringend m. _attendant, member of a retinue_, #Gl#.

ymbhūung = ymbhȳwung

ymbhwearft = ymbhwyrft  [[headword spelled “ymbhwyrf”]]

ymbhweorfan^3 (e^2, u^2) _to turn round, revolve go round, encompass_:
_tend, cultivate_, CP.

ymbhweorfnes f. _change, revolution_, DR 37^18.

ymbhweorft (e^2) = ymbhwyrft  [[headword spelled “ymbhwyrf”]]

ymbhwerf- (u^2, y^2) = ymbhweorf-

ymbhwyrf (e, ea, eo, i) m. _rotation, revolution, turn_: _circle,
extent, environment, circuit, orbit_, Æ, CP: _circle of the earth, orb,
globe, world_, Æ, AO: _region, district_: _cultivation_, Æ.

ymbhycgan _to think about, reflect on, consider_.

ymb-hȳde-, -hȳdi- = ymbhȳdig-

ymbhȳdig _anxious, solicitous, careful, suspicious_: _to be observed,
needing attention_, Æ. adv. -līce.

ymbhȳdiglic _anxious, careful, solicitous_. adv. -līce.

ymbhȳdignes f. _anxiety, solicitude_, Æ.

ymbhygd f. _anxiety_, #Bl#, GD.

ymbhygdig = ymbhȳdig

ymbhȳpan _to press round, assail_.

ymbhȳwung (-hūung) f. _circumcision_, JnL 7^22.

ymbiernan^3 (io, y) _to run round_.

ymblǣdan _to lead round_, OET (VHy 7^18).

ymblǣrgian (emb-) _to provide with a rim, surround_, OEG 8^377. [lǣrig]

ymblicgan^5 _to surround, enclose_, AO.

ymblīðan^1 _to sail round_, BH 408^25.

ymblōcian _to look round_, NG.

ymblofian _to praise_, #LPs# 116^1.

ymblyt m. _circle, circuit, circumference_, #Sat# 7?

ymbren n. _‘Ember-’tide, Ember-day_, _Lk, LL_. [ymbryne]

ymbrendæg m. _Ember-day_.

ymbrene = ymbryne

ymbrenfæsten n. _periodical fast (at Ember-tide)_, Æ.

ymbren-wice, -wuce f. _Ember-week_, LL 78[43].

ymbrigdæg = ymbrendæg

ymbrine = ymbryne

ymbryne (e^2, i^2) m. _revolution, circuit, course, anniversary_, Æ:
_lapse of time_, Æ.

ymbscēawian _to look round_, NG.

ymbscēawiendlīce adv. _circumspectly_, BH 450^21.

ymbscēawung f. _‘circumspectio,’ looking round_, DR.

ymbscīnan^1 _to shine round_, Æ.

ymbscrīðan^1 _to revolve about_, #Met# 20^208.

ymbscrȳdan _to clothe_, Æ. [scrūd]

ymbscūwan _to screen, defend (‘obumbrare’)_, #EPs# 139^8.

ymbscȳnan = ymbscīnan

ymbsēan (N) = ymbsēon II.

ymbsellan _to surround, enclose, beset_, Æ.

ymbsēon I. sv^5 _to look round_. II. f. _beholding, regard_.

ymb-set, -setl n. _siege_.

ymbsetennes f. _siege_.

ymbsetnung f. _sedition_: _siege_.

ymbsett _neighbouring_, BH 362.

ymbsettan _to set round, surround, beset, encompass_, Æ: _plant_.

ymb-sierwan, -sirwan pres. 3 sg. -sireð _to design, plot_, CP: _lay in
wait for_.

ymbsittan^5 _to set round, surround, invest, besiege_, Æ, AO, CP: _sit
over, reflect upon_.

ymbsittend † m. _one living near, neighbour_.

ymbsmēagung (embe-) f. _consideration_, WW 165^28.

ymbsnāð, ymbsniden, pret. 3 sg. and pp. of ymbsnīðan.

ymbsnidennes f. _circumcision_, Æ.

ymbsnīðan^1 _to circumcise_, Æ.

ymbspænning f. _allurement_, NC 335.

ymbspannan^7 _to span or clasp round, embrace_, BH 392^6.

ymbsprǣc f. _conversation, comment, criticism_, Æ.

ymbsprǣce ‡ _spoken about, well known_.

ymbsprecan^3 _to speak about_, Lk 19^7.

ymbstandan^6 _to stand around, surround_.

ymbstandend m. _bystander_, Æ (emb-).

ymb-standennes, -standnes f. ‘_circumstantia_,’ #Pss#.

ymbstrīcan _to smooth round_, #Lcd# 36b.

ymbstyrian _to stir about, overturn_, LkL 15^8.

ymbswǣpe f. _digression_, WW 5^28.

ymbswāpan^7 _to sweep round, environ_: _envelop, clothe_.

ymbswāpe = ymbswǣpe

ymbswīfan^1 _to revolve round_, NC 352.

ymbsyllan = ymbsellan

ymbsyrwan = ymbsierwan

ymb-trymian, -trymman (Æ, CP) _to surround_: _fortify, protect_.

ymbtrymming m. _fortification_, Æ.

ymbtȳnan _to hedge round, surround_, W 146^27. [tūn]

ymbtyrnan _to turn round_: _surround_.

ymbðeahtian _to consider, reflect_, CP.

ymbðencan _to think about, consider_, CP.

ymbðonc = ymbeðanc

ymbðreodian (embðryd-) _to deliberate_, #Gl#.

ymbðreodung (i, y) f. _deliberation, consideration_.

ymbðringan^3 _to press round, throng about_.

ymbðringend = ymbhringend

ymbðrydung = ymbðreodung

ymbūtan prep. (w. a.) and adv. _around, about, outside, beyond_, AO, CP.

ymbwǣfan _to clothe_, #LPs# 44^15.

ymbwærian _to turn (oneself) about, turn towards_, NG.

ymbweaxan^6 _to grow round, surround_, AO.

ymbwendan _to turn round_: _turn away, avert_.

ymbwendnes f. _transmutation, change_.

ymbwendung f. _reviving, quickening_: _behaviour_, DR.

ymbweorpan^3 _to surround_, #An# 1555.

ymbwīcigan _to surround, beleaguer_, #Ex# 65.

ymbwindan^3 _to clasp round, hold_: _wind round_.

ymbwlātian _to contemplate_, Æ 145^12.

ymbwlātung f. _contemplation_, Æ.

ymbwrītan^1 _to score round, circumscribe_, #Lcd# 124a.

ymbwyrcan _to hedge in, wall in_, CP: _weave_, MtL 27^29.

ymbyrnan = ymbiernan

ymcyme = ymbcyme

ymel (æ, e) m. _weevil, mite, beetle, caterpillar_, #ÆGr#; GD (e).

ymele, ymle f. _scroll_, Æ.

ymen m. _‘hymn,’ sacred song_, _Bl, Pss_. [_L._ hymnus]

ymenbōc f. _book of hymns_, BH 484^23.

ymener = ymnere

ymensang m. _hymn_, GD, #AJPs#.

ymesēne _blind_, ÆH 1·418^22.

ymest = yfemest

ymle (Æ) = ymele

ymmon, ymn = ymen

ymnere m. _hymn-book_, _EC_ 250. [‘_hymner_’; _L._ hymnarium]

ymnyttan = emnettan  [[redirected to “efenetan”]]

ȳmon = ȳmen  [[headword spelled “ymen”]]

ymryne = ymbryne

yn- = in-

ynce m. ‘_inch_,’ _LL, Sol_. [_L._ uncia]

yndse f. _ounce_, AO: _piece of money, shekel_. [_L._ uncia]

yngrian = hyngrian  [[under “hyngran”]]

ynn- = inn-

ynnelēac (ene-, yne-, ynni-) n. _onion_, #Gl#.

ynse, yntse (Æ) = yndse

yplen (WW) = ypplen

±yppan _to bring out, open, manifest_: _disclose, display, reveal,
betray_, CP: _come forth, be disclosed_: (+) _utter_.

yppe I. (u) f. _upper room_: _raised place, high seat, tribune_: _stage,
platform_, WW 150^9. II. _evident, known, open, manifest_.

ypping f. _manifestation_: _accumulation, extent, expanse_? #Ex# 498.

yppingīren (ip-) n. _crowbar_? LL 455^15 (or ? cippingīren ANS 115·164).

ypplen n. _top, height_, OEG 2862.

ypte pret. 3 sg. of yppan.

ȳr I. † m. _name of the rune for =y=_: _bow_?: _gold_? _horn_? #Run# 27.
II. m. _back of axe_, #Chr# 1012.

yrcðu = iergðu

yrd = eard

yrd- = yrð-

ȳre (pl. ōran) f. _a coin of Danish origin_, BC 3·371^2.

ȳren = īren

yreðweorh (#Jul# 90?) = ierreðweorh

yrfan _to inherit_: _leave (by will)_.

yrfcwealm (a^2) m. _murrain_, #Chr# 986#ce#. [orf]

yrfe = ierfe

yrfebēc fp. _will, testament_, Æ.

yrfecwealm = yrfcwealm

yrfefyrst m. _legal formality or delay before entering on an
inheritance_, WW 115^3.

yrfegedāl n. _division of an inheritance_, Æ.

yrfegeflit n. _dispute about an inheritance_, EC 145^16.

yrfegewrit n. _will, testament, charter_, EC 145.

yrfehand (e^1) f. _natural successor_, EC 111^14.

yrfelāf f. _bequest, inheritance_: _heir_, #Ex# 403.

yrfeland n. _inherited land_, CP (ie).

yrfelēas _unprovided with cattle_, TC 162^27 (ie).

yrfe-numa, -nama (MF 179) mf. _heir, successor_, Æ.

yrfestōl † m. _hereditary seat, home_.

yrfeweard m. _heir, son_, AO, CP (ie).

±yrfeweardian _to inherit_, #CLSPs#.

yrfeweardnes f. _heritage_, CP (ie).

yrfeweardwrītere, yrfewrītend m. _will writer, testator_, Æ.

yrfweard- = yrfeweard-

+yrgan = eargian

  [[main entry is ±eargian]]

yrgð, yrgðo, yrhðu = iergðu

yrm- = eorm-, ierm-

yrnan = iernan

yrre == ierre

yrs- = iers-

yrsebin f. _iron box_, LL 455[17] (?= īsern, BT).

yrð (ea; = ie) f. _ploughing, tilling_, LL: _standing corn, crop,
produce_, _BH_. [‘_earth_’]

yrðland (æ, ie) n. _arable land_, _CD, WW_; Æ. [‘_earthland_’]

yrðling (æ, e, eo, i) m. _husbandman, farmer, ploughman_, _WW_; Æ:
_wagtail_? ANS 119·434. [‘_earthling_’]

yrðtilia = eorðtilia

ys = is, v. wesan.

ȳs == īs

ysel = esol

ysele = ysle  [[spelled “ȳsle” under “ȳsl”]]

ȳsen = īsen

ȳsern = īsern

ȳsl, ȳsle f. _spark, ember_, _Æ_. [‘_isel_’]

yslende _glowing_, WW 235^28.

ysope f., ysopo (indecl.) ‘_hyssop_,’ _Æ, Lcd, VPs_.

ȳst f. _storm, tempest, hurricane_, AO, CP.

ȳstan _to storm, rage_, OEG.

ȳstas = ēstas np. of ēst.

ȳstig _stormy, of the storm_.

yt = itt pres. 3 sg. of etan.

ȳtan I. _to drive out, banish_, #Chr# 1058#d#: _squander, dissipate_, RB
55^4. [ūt] II. = ūtan

Ytas = Iotas  [[headword spelled “Īotas”]]

ȳtemest superl. adj. _uttermost, extreme, last_, AO, CP. on ȳtemestum
sīðe ‘_in extremis_.’ [ūte]

ȳtend m. _devastator_, WW 232^37.

yteren _made of otter-skin_, AO 18^21. [otor]

ȳterra = ūterra  [[under “ūtera”]]

yteð = iteð, pres. 3 sg. of etan.

ȳting f. _outing, journey_, Æ.

ȳt-mest, -mæst = ȳtemest

ytst, ytt = itst pres. 2 sg., itt pres. 3 sg., of etan.

ȳttera, ȳttra = ūter(r)a

ȳð I. f. _wave, billow, flood_, Æ, CP: (†) _sea_: _liquid, water_. II. =
īeð

ȳð- = ēað-, īeð-

ȳðan = (1) īðan; (2) ȳðgian

ȳðbord n. _ship_? _ship’s side_? #Cra# 57.

ȳðeg = ȳðig

ȳðegan = ȳðgian

ȳðfaru † f. _wave-course, flood_.

ȳðgebland † n. _wave-mixture, surge_.

ȳðgewinn † n. _wave-strife, life in the waves_.

ȳðgian _to fluctuate, flow, surge_, CP: _roar, rage_.

ȳðgung = ȳðung

ȳðhengest m. _(wave-horse), ship_, #Chr# 1003#e#.

ȳðhof † n. _water-dwelling, ship_.

ȳðian (Æ) = ȳðgian

ȳðig _billowy, stormy_, ÆL 16^70.

ȳðlād f. _sea-voyage_, B 228.

ȳðlāf † f. _sand, shore, beach_.

ȳðlid † n. _ship, vessel_.

ȳðlida m. _wave-traverser, ship_, B 198.

ȳðmearh † m. _sea-horse, ship_.

ȳðmere m. _ocean of waves_, #Ph# 94.

ȳðung f. _agitation, commotion_, Æ: _inundation_, Æ.

ȳðwōrigende _wandering on the waves_, WW 243^3.

ȳwan, ȳwian = īewan




CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


ERRATA

Errors in Anglo-Saxon words were treated more conservatively than those
in the modern text. The most common change was adding or removing a
macron in cross-references:

  Printed text
    mēs (K) = mȳs, v. mus.
  Cross-referenced entry
    mūs f. gs. mūs, mūse, nap. mȳs ‘_mouse_,’ ...

Since both headwords have a long vowel, the cross-reference was changed
to match. All apparent errors, whether corrected or not, are listed
below in [[double brackets]]. The author’s corrections and additions are
not repeated unless there is an error in the correction itself.

Most errors are trivial, such as missing or incorrect punctuation or
misplaced italics. The word “invisible” in corrections means that there
is an appropriately sized blank space in the printed text. Punctuation
at the end of entries was silently regularized, and missing or invisible
periods (full stops) after standard abbreviations such as “m.” or “pl.”
were silently supplied. Other errors in punctuation or typography are
listed separately, after the more substantive errors.

In references to the OED (“New English Dictionary”), hyphenization does
not always correspond to the OED form. These inconsistencies were left
as printed; words split at line-end were not generally checked against
their OED form.


Abbreviations:

  #Sc# = Defensor’s Liber Scintillarum
    [[_printed SC in list, but always #Sc# in body text_]]


Author’s Additions and Corrections:

  ærendung ...  [[_body text has “ǣrendung”_]]
  āsanian ...  [[_body text has “āsānian”_]]
  +bearded _having a beard_ ...  [[_r in “beard” invisible_]]
  besceawere ...  [[_body text has “bescēawere”_]]
  cwēme- = cwēm-  [[cwem-]]
  +fadung ...  [[_body text has “±fadung”_]]
  flogettan ...  [[_body text has “floggettan”_]]
  forecweden _aforesaid_, GD 12; 344. [[_error for 344^12?_]]
  forlætednes (GD 227^16) = forlætennes  [[_error for ǣ in both?_]]
  hūselbox ...  [[huselbox]]


Dictionary Text:

  āblisian (Æ) = āblysian  [[āblȳsian]]
  ācǣgan = ācīgan [[acīgan]]
  ācwīnan^1 ...  [[acwīnan]]
  ǣcelma m. _chilblain_, OEG, WW.  [[æcelma]]
  ǣfæst = ǣwfæst  [[æwfæst]]
  ǣhwǣr, -hwār = āhwǣr  [[āhwær]]
  æig = æg  [[error for “ǣg”?]]
  ǣlc [ēlc, ylc (#VPs#); v. ‘_each_’]  [[elc]]
  ǣnlēp- = ānlēp-  [[ānlep-]]
  ǣscære _unshorn, untrimmed_. [scieran]  [[error for “ǣscǣre”?]]
  ǣstǣnan = āstǣnan  [[āstænan]]
  ǣtere (ē^1) m. _‘eater,’ glutton_, _Prov_; NG.  [[“Prov” unchanged]]
  āgryndan  [[āgrȳndan]]
  ālifian = ālibban  [[alibban]]
  ālȳfed- = ālīefed-  [[alīefed-]]
  anihst † _last, in the last place_.  [[error for “anīhst”?]]
  āracsian = ārāsian  [[ārasian]]
  ārgifa m. _giver of benefits_, #Cra# 11.  [[#Craft#]]
  āsceortian = āscortian  [[ascortian]]
  āsparian _to preserve_, GD 159^24.  [[āspariān]]
  āðēstrian = āðēostrian  [[aðēostrian]]
  āðrescan = āðerscan  [[aðerscan]]
  āwārnian ...  [[error for “āwarnian”?]]
  awel m. _hook, fork_, #Gl#.  [[error for “āwel”?]]
  āwendedlic = āwendendlic  [[āwendendlīc]]
  āwierg-an, -ian ... _Æ, Mt, CP_; VPs.  [[VP]]

  -bādere v. nīed-b.  [[nied-b.]]
  benǣman ... [niman]  [[nīman]]
  bīgegnes = bīgengnes  [[bigengnes]]
  bisæc n? m? _wallet_, MtR 10^10. [_L._ bisaccium]  [[LL.]]
  bisceophād ... _CPPs_.  [[error for _CPs, PPs_?]]
  blēoh = blēo  [[bleoh]]
  brēostgebeorh m. _bulwark_, WW 466^14.  [[breostgebeorh]]
  brycgwyrcende ‘_pontifex_’! DR 194^16.
    [[exclamation mark in original]]
  bȳgel = bēogol  [[beogol]]
  +byrðtid = +byrdtīd  [[error for “+byrðtīd”?]]
  byrððīnenu f. _midwife_, GPH 392.  [[error for “-ðinenu”?]]

  ceīce (MtLR) = cēace  [[error for “ceice”?]]
  cellender n., cellendre f. = celendre  [[= cellendre]]
  cīepehūs (ǣ^1) n. _storehouse_, WW 186^11.  [[cīepehus]]
  clā = clēa, clawu  [[clāwu]]
  crīsten m. crīst(e)na f. ‘_Christian_,’ _AO_.  [[crīst(e)na m.]]
  cwelm = cwealm (but v. MFH 106), cwielm-  [[- missing or invisible]]

  dǣdbōtnes = dǣdbētnes  [[dǣdbetnes]]
  dægrima m. _dawn, daybreak, morning_, _Æ_. [[‘_day-rim_’]]
    [[dayrim _i.e. misprinted as simple cross-reference rather than
    OED citation_]]
  drohtung f.  [[drohtnung]]
  +dȳrsian ... [dīere]  [[diēre]]

  ēacan = īecan  [[eācan]]
  ealdlandrǣden  [[ealdlandræden]]
  earcnanstān = eorcnanstān  [[eorsnanstān]]
  ēarelipprica = ēarliprica  [[ēarliprīca]]
  ēastan, ēastane  [[eastane]]
  ēaðmēde = (1) ēaðmōd, (2) ēaðmēdu  [[eaðmēdu]]

  fāmblāwende v. līg-f.  [[lig-f.]]
  -felma v. ǣger-f.  [[æger-f.]]
  fērblǣd = fǣrblǣd  [[færblǣd]]
  -fyrede v. twi-, ðri-f.  [[-fȳrede]]
  fyrhtnes f. _fear_, AO.  [[fryhtnes]]

  gabote (u^2) f. _side-dish_, #EGl#. [[_L._ gabata]]
    [[#EGl# printed as shown: error for Erf?]]
  gȳt ... II. = gīet  [[giet]]
  gorettan ... _pour forth, emit_, GPH 398.  [[pour fourth]]
  gūðfona = gūðfana  [[guðfana]]
  gūðgetāwe = gūðgeatwe  [[guðgeatwe]]

  hengetrēow (enge-) n. _gallows_, GPH 395.  [[hengetreow]]
  heregeatland n. _heriot-land_, LL 220.  [[L 220]]
  hīo v. hē.  [[he]]
  hit v. hē. [‘_it_’]  [[hīt]]
  hlāford-swīcung (MFN 167; W 225^28)  [[MFN as shown]]
  +hnyst _contrite_, †#PsC# 127.  [[error for #CPs#?]]
  hrǣron pret. pl. of hrēran.  [[hreran]]
  hrȳst pres. 3 sg. of hrēosan.  [[hēosan]]
  hundtwelftig num. _hundred and twenty_, Æ, AO.
    [[error for “hundred and twelve”?]]
  hweder = hwider  [[hwīder]]
  -hwielfan (e, y) v. ā-, be-, of-hw. [hwealf]  [[bē-]]
  hwīlum ... [[‘_whilom_’]]
    [[whilom _i.e. misprinted as simple cross-reference rather than
    OED citation_]]
  ±hyscan (ea, i)
    [[spelled “hȳscan” in 3 of 5 cross-references, compound “onhȳscan”;
    first edition also has “hȳscan”]]

  īgbūend = īegbūend  [[īegbuend]]
  innāwritting (_LkL_) = onwrīting  [[onwriting]]

  lǣgt = līget  [[liget]]
  -lǣnung v. feoh-l.  [[fēoh-l.]]
  -læppede v. fīf-l.  [[fif-l.]]
  lēasbregd == lēasbrēd  [[leasbrēd]]
  -lendisc v. dūn-, ūp-, ūre-, ūt-l.  [[up-, ūre-, ut-l.]]
  līming f. _smearing, plastering_, _WW_. [‘_liming_’]  [[_limīng_]]

  magogeoguð f. _youth_, #Cr# 1429.  [[#Cri#]]
  manðēof m. _man-stealer_, v. LL 2·542.  [[L 2·542]]
  mealehūs = meluhūs  [[meluhus]]
  megol == meagol  [[meago]]
  mēs (K) = mȳs, v. mūs.  [[mus]]
  mūha (_Cp_) = mūga  [[muga]]

  nēad- v. also nīed-, nȳd-.  [[nīed]]
  nīge- = nigo-  [[error for “nige-”?]]
  +nycled (#Gl#) = +cnycled  [[+cyncled]]

  ongefæstnian = onfæstnian  [[onfæstian]]
  onhȳscan (ī) ... [hūsc]  [[husc]]
  oportanie = aprotane  [[aprōtane]]
  ōsle f. ... [amsel]  [[error for “_Ger._ amsel”?]]

  +rǣdelīce = +rǣdlīce  [[+rædlīce]]
  rīning = hrīning  [[hrīnung]]

  -sagol v. lēas-, sōð-, wær-s.  [[wǣr-s.]]
  sāh ... II. pret. 3 sg. of sēon.  [[“of” missing]]
  -sānian v. ā-s.  [[a-s.]]
  scēofan = scūfan  [[scufan]]
  scēwyrhta = scēowyrhta  [[sceowyrhta]]
  scofen pp. of scufan.  [[error for “scūfan”?]]
  searocēne _very bold_, †#PsC# 10.  [[error for “#CPs#”?]]
  sēoc ... _FAp, Gu_.  [[FatAp]]
  -sēoung (ēu) v. ēag-s.  [[eag-s.]]
  -snæcce v. twi-s.  [[twī-s.]]
  swȳwian = sūgian, swīgian  [[error for “sugian”?]]

  tilia, tilig(e)a (y) m. _tiller, workman, hand ..._  [[hind]]
  tōcleofian = tōclifian  [[toclifian]]
  tōgenēalǣcan = tōnēalǣcan  [[tōnealǣcan]]
  tōscyl-lan, -ian  [[tōrscyl-lan]]
  trilidi = ðrilīði  [[i and ī mismatched as shown]]
  twȳlic (Æ) = twēolic  [[tweolic]]
  tymp- = timp-  [[tymb-]]

  ðegnlic _noble, brave, loyal_, Æ. adv. -lice.
    [[printed as shown: error for “-līce”?]]
  ðēowen, ðēowene = ðēowe  [[ðeowe]]
  ðrēanȳd == ðrēanīed  [[ðrēanied]]

  un-āræfned, -āræfne(n)dlic  [[un-aræfned]]
  unscæðð-ende (e), -ig _innocent, harmless_.  [[unscæðð-ēnde]]
  unscyldiglic ... #Bk# 12.  [[Bk]]
  unsidelice _immodestly_, NC 330.
    [[printed as shown: error for “-līce”?]]
  untō-dǣlend-, dǣl-, dāl-, -dēlen- = untō-dǣled-  [[untō-dæled-]]
  unwerlīce = unwærlīce  [[unwærlice]]
  ūpyrne = ūpryne  [[upryne]]

  wæglīðende † _seafaring_.  [[error for “wǣglīðende”?]]
  wāgrift (e, y) n. _wall-hanging, tapestry, vail, curtain_.
    [[variant spelling of “veil”?]]
  wan I. (once +; o) (usu. indecl. and used predicatively)  [[undecl.]]
  wealhhāfoc m. _foreign hawk, falcon_.  [[error for “-hafoc”?]]
  wīdobān = wiðobān  [[error for “widobān”?]]
  wiflēast f. _lack of women_, ÆL 10^216.  [[error for “wīfleast”?]]
  wīnhrēafetian _to gather grapes_, #LPs# 79^13.  [[winhrēafetian]]
  wurma ... _any dye, woad, purple_  [[any die]]

  ymb-hȳde-, -hȳdi- = ymbhȳdig-  [[ymb-hȳde]]
  ysope f., ysopo (indecl.) ‘_hyssop_,’ _Æ, Lcd, VPs_.  [[VP]]


Punctuation and Typography:

  ābūfan (= on-) adv. _above_, #Chr# 1090#e#.  [[1090E]]
  āc ... _name of the rune for =a=_.
    [[italicized to match other “rune for“ entries]]
  ācennednes (_WG_; _Æ_)   [[punctuated and italicized as shown]]
  ādel I. = ādl.  [[ādl;]]
  ādrēosan^2 _to fall to pieces, decline, vanish, fail_.
    [[, after “vanish” invisible]]
  adūnweard adv. _downwards_, _ChrL_. [‘_a-downward_’]
    [[hyphen in “a-downward” invisible]]
  ǣc I. f. = āc.  [[āc;]]
  æfse I. = efes.  [[efes;]]
  æl- prefix = I. eal(l)-.  [[eal(l)-;]]
  ǣrist I. (ē) mfn. _rising_, _VPs_  [[_rising_ _VPs_]]
  ālīes-ednes, -(e)nes (ē, ȳ) f. _redemption, ransom_, _MtWLR_:
    [[_MtWL, R_]]
  andfeng (on-) m. _seizing, receiving, taking_,
    [[_seizing, receiving, taking_.]]
  ānemnan _to announce, declare_, _Gu_. [‘_aname_’]
    [[close quote missing]]
  arblast m. _cross-bow_, #Chr# 1079#d#. [_OFr._ arbaleste]  [[O.Fr.]]
  æsc ... _name of the rune for =æ=_.
    [[italicized to match other “rune for“ entries]]
  āwirgan = I. āwyrgan.  [[āwyrgan;]]

  bānrift (y) n. _leggings, leg-armour, greaves_, #Gl#, WW (-rist).
    [[, after “greaves” invisible]]
  bēah I. = bēag. II. pret. 3 sg. of būgan.  [[bēag II.]]
  beccen m. _buyer_, WW (#KGl#) 75^36. [= bycgend]  [[KG]]
  ±bed ... II. = bedd.  [[bedd]]
  ±beorh I. == beorg.  [[beorg]]
  berēfian (#KGl#) = berēafian  [[KG]]
  besmocian _to smoke, envelop with incense_, ANS 84·3.  [[#Ans#]]
  betrendan _to roll_, ES 37·180.  [[_to roll_ ES]]
  betst ... _AO, Chr, Cr_  [[CR]]
  +bregd I. n. _movement, change_, #Ph# 57. II. = brǣd III.  [[PH]]
  broc ... _WW_.  [[. after “_WW_” invisible]]
  bȳg- = bī-, bē-, bīg-  [[bī, bē-]]

  cēas I. = cēast.  [[cēast;]]
  ±cīdan (w. d. or wið) _contend, quarrel_  [[open parenthesis missing]]
  clomm I. m. = clamm.  [[clamm]]
  cnēow I. (ēo) n. ‘_knee_,’ _AO, Bl, El, Mt_:  [[Ao]]
  ±crēopan^2 (occly. refl.)  [[occly refl.]]
  cwellere ... _BH, Mk_; Æ. [‘_queller_’]  [[MK]]
  cwene f. _woman_, _Rd, W_: ...  [[_Rd, W_;]]
  ±cwician ... [‘_quick_’]  [[close quote missing]]
  ±cynd ... _gender_, _Ph_:  [[ge in “gender” invisible]]

  dæg ... ofer midne d. _afternoon_.  [[_afternoon_,]]
  dēaf I. ... _empty, barren_, ...
    [[_empty, barren_.]]
  dēopnes f. _depth, abyss_, _LPs, Nic_:  [[_LPs, Nic_.]]
  ±dōn ... betre, furðor d. _prefer_.  [[furðor, d.]]
  dūnlic _of a mountain, mountain-dwelling_, WW 376^6.
    [[, after “dwelling” invisible]]
  ±dwola ... _madman, deceiver, heretic_, _Æ, Bl_:  [[BL]]
  dȳpan ... _anoint_, #EPs# 140^5  [[_anoint_ #EPs#]]

  +efenlīcian ... #AV^2Ps# 25^3.  [[printed as shown]]

  fǣrdēað m. _sudden death_, WW 351^19.  [[, after “death” invisible]]
  feðriht _feathered_, MtL p7^17.  [[_feathered_.]]
  fīftig num. ‘_fifty_,’ _Æ_: sb. _a set of fifty_, _Mk_.
    [[_a set of fifty_.]]
  fitt ... v. #SkED# under fit (2)  [[#SkED.#]]
  flǣsc (ē) n. ‘_flesh_,’ _Æ, Cp, Lk, VP_; CP:  [[error for “VPs”?]]
  forgrindet n. _grinding, pounding_, Cp 776#c#.  [[Cp.]]
  forðframian _to grow to maturity_, WW 465^10.
    [[_to grow to maturity_.]]
  fullendian _to complete_, _BH_. [‘_fullend_’]  [[close quote missing]]
  fȳran I. = fēran.  [[fēran]]
  fȳrtang f. ‘_(fire-)tongs_,’ A 9·263.  [[printed (‘fire-)tongs,’]]

  gamen ... _B, Bo_; Æ, CP.  [[BO]]
  gēargetal (æ^1) n. _number of years_, #Lcd# 2·284.
    [[_number of years_ #Lcd#]]
  geond-spurnan, -spyrnian _to cause to stumble_, NG.
    [[_to cause to stumble_ NG.]]
  grimmān n. _terrible sin_, BH 50^8#b#.  [[50, 8#b#]]
  gristbitian ... [‘_gristbite_’]  [[printed ‘[gristbite’] ]]

  hādor ... (or ? hador = heaðor)  [[hador, =]]
  hearg (æ, e) nap. heargas, (e)  [[heargas, e _without parentheses_]]
  hlēofæst _consoling, protecting_, #Cr#, RB.  [[CR]]
  hoferede _humpbacked_, _CP, Lcd, WW_. [‘_hovered_’]
    [[. after “CP, Lcd, WW” invisible]]
  holm ... in prose, esp. in place-names
    [[mismatched close parenthesis after “place-names”:
    error, or missing open parenthesis before first “esp.”?]]
  hrurul ‘_deciduus_,’ BDS 30·11^33.  [[#BDs#]]
  hūsul- = hūs(e)l-  [[hūs(e)l]]

  lætnes f. _slowness, delay_, ÆL 23b^647: _sloth_, GD 174^23.
    [[, after “_sloth_” invisible]]
  lāf ... tō lāfe _alone_.  [[_alone_,]]
  lēag ... _Ep, Lcd_.  [[d in “Lcd” invisible]]
  lēohtian I. _to be lightened, relieved_.  [[t in “to be” invisible]]
  lēohtlic I. _light, of little weight or importance_, Æ, CP.
    [[, after “importance” invisible]]
  lēon I. (sv^1) _to lend, grant_. [[_Ger._ leihen]]
    [[i in “leihen” invisible]]
  listan = lystan  [[l in “listan” invisible]]
  ±lōme ... oft (and) +l. _constantly, diligently_.
    [[second t in “constantly” invisible]]
  ±lūtan^2 _to bend, stoop, decline_, Æ, AO:  [[: after “AO” invisible]]
  +lygnod _perjured_, Æ (i).
    [[printed as continuation of “lygnian” entry]]

  +mæcca ... _husband, wife_, _Æ, Mt, OET_.  [[_husband, wife_.]]
  +mǣl _stained, dyed_, #An# 1333.  [[AN]]
  mǣne ... III. _false, mean, wicked_.  [[. after “wicked” invisible]]
  mæssecrēda m. _creed said at mass, Nicene creed_.  [[mass. Nicene]]
  marman-stān ... _Æ, Bl_. [‘_marmstan_’]  [[missing . after “Æ, Bl”]]
  māse f. _name of a small bird_, #Gl#.  [[_... bird_ #Gl#.]]
  māðmcyst f. _treasure-chest_, Mt 27^6.
    [[, after “treasure-chest” invisible]]
  māðmhūs n. _treasure-house, treasury_, AO, CP.  [[AO. CP.]]
  mōt ... III. pres. sg. of *mōtan.
    [[printed “_pres._ sg.” in italics]]
  munucbehāt n. _monastic vow_, HL 18^81,95.  [[18,^81,95]]

  nāgan* ... AO. nāhte _ought not_.  [[AO nāhte]]
  nāhtnes f. _worthlessness_, #Chr# 449#a#.  [[449a _lower case_]]
  nīehst ... _CP, Chr, KC, MkL_ (ē).  [[CP not italicized]]
  nytennes (e, i) f. _ignorance, laziness, ignominy_, Æ.
    [[, after “ignominy” invisible]]

  ofer-gān ... _Æ, An_:  [[: after “_Æ, An_” invisible]]
  ō-hwǣr = ā-hwǣr  [[-ā-hwǣr]]
  onlīcnes f. _resemblance, likeness, similitude_, _Gen_:  [[Gen.:]]
  onrīsan (_Æ_) = ārīsan. [‘_onrise_’]  [[missing . after “ārīsan”]]
  onweald ... _jurisdiction, territory_, CP.  [[missing . after “CP”]]
  onwegācyrrednes, -cyrnes f. _apostasy_, BH 176 (_v.l._).
    [[anomalous italics in “v.l.”]]

  prēostlagu f. _ecclesiastical law, canon law_, LL 380[2,3].
    [[, after “canon law” invisible]]

  rāw (_Lcd_ 89b) = rǣw. [‘_row_’]  [[rǣw [‘_row_’].]]
  rihtwīslic _righteous_, CP  [[_righteous_ CP]]
  ryplen? _made of broom_. [A 31·536]
    [[_made of broom_ [A 31·536]. ]]

  sagu (±) ... II. f. _‘saw’ (tool)_, _A, WW_.
    [[l in “tool” invisible]]
  sāh I. ... II. pret. 3 sg. of sēon.
    [[s in “sāh” and “sēon” both invisible]]
  samen adv. _together_, JnR (o^1).  [[, after “together” invisible]]
  scēawung ... AO, CP:  [[AO. CP:]]
  ±scencan ... Æ, CP. [‘_shench_’; _Ger._ schenken]  [[Æ. CP.]]
  scernicge (= ie) f. _actress, female jester_, _A_;  [[_A_,]]
  scīmian _to shine, glisten_, _ÆGr, LkL_:  [[ÆGr. LkL]]
  scīnnes I. f. _radiance_, MkL 13^24. II. = scīenes  [[#MkL#]]
  scipforðung f. _equipment of ships_, LL 314[´].
    [[bracketed [´] in original]]
  scopgereord (eo^1) n. _language of poetry_, BH.
    [[, after “poetry” invisible]]
  sittan^5 ... _Æ, B, Bo, Bl, Chr_; AO, CP  [[Bl. Chr]]
  +slēfed _furnished with sleeves_. [‘_sleve_’]
    [[printed as continuation of “slēfan” entry]]
  snōca m. _nook_? _inlet_, BC 3·141´ (v. Mdf).  [[_inlet_ BC]]
  ±swāpan^7 _to sweep, drive, swing, rush (of wind)_.
    [[f in “of” invisible; close parenthesis missing]]

  ±temprian ... _Æ_ (refl.), _Lcd, Sc_.  [[_Lcd Sc_.]]
  ±trūwian ... _to trust_, _Æ, CP, JnL_.  [[_to trust_ _Æ, CP, JnL_.]]
  tungolgim m. _(bright) star_, #Cr# 1151.
    [[open parenthesis invisible]]
  twig n. _‘twig,’ branch, sprout, shoot, small tree_, Æ, CP.
    [[, after “tree” invisible]]
  twiscyldig _liable to a double penalty_, LL 90#h#.
    [[first l in “liable” invisible]]

  ðēote f. ... _conduit, pipe_, Æ. [ðēotan]  [[_conduit, pipe_.]]
  ðrīst, ðrīste ... _audacious, shameless_, _CP, W_.
    [[_audacious, shameless_.]]

  unacumenlicnes f. _unbearableness_, RBL 114^9.  [[#RBl#]]
  unārlic ... _contrary to what is fitting, unnatural (of a will)_, WW.
    [[first l in “will” invisible]]
  under-bæc, -bæcling  [[under-bæc.]]
  underðēodan ... Æ, CP: _support_, OEG 4339.  [[Æ, CP _support_]]
  unmiltsigendlic _unworthy of compassion, unpardonable_, Æ. [milts]
    [[_unworthy of compassion. unpardonable_.]]
  unondcȳðignes f. _ignorance_, #JVPs# 24^7.
    [[_ignorance_ #JVPs#]]
  unræfniendlic _intolerable_, #SPs# 123^4 (on-).
    [[l in “unræfniendlic” invisible]]
  ūser I. poss. pron. gen. ūsses _our_.
    [[first s in “ūsses” invisible]]

  wamwyrcende (o) _worker of sin_, #Cr# 1093.  [[CR]]
  wealca ... _light floating garment_.  [[l in “_light” invisible]]
  weall ... Æ, AO, CP; Mdf:  [[Æ AO, CP]]
  weallsteall m. _wall-place, foundation_? #Wa# 88.  [[#Wand#]]
  +wēde n. _fury, rage, madness_, Æ. [wōd]
    [[_fury, rage, madness_ Æ.]]
  weg I. (æ) m. _‘way,’ direction_, Æ, AO:  [[Æ AO:]]
  weorccræft m. _mechanics_, OEG 55^6.  [[_mechanics_ OEG]]
  weorc-uhta? ... _hour of matins on a non-festival day_, NC 332
    [[_... day_ NC]]
  ±wīcian ... _encamp, bivouac_, CP:  [[_encamp, bivouac_.]]
  wiersa m., wierse fn. (comp. of yfel)  [[close parenthesis missing]]
  +wif ... II. n. _a disease of the eye_, #Lcd#
    [[_a disease of the eye_ #Lcd#]]
  willsele m. _pleasant dwelling_, #Ph# 213.
    [[_pleasant dwelling_ #Ph#]]
  +winnesful = +winful  [[ul in “winful” invisible]]
  ±winnstow f. _wrestling place_.  [[lin in “wrestling” invisible]]
  winnung = windung  [[g in “windung” invisible]]
  wīnreced † n. _wine-hall_. [[e-h in “wine-hall” invisible]]
  wiðerwinna m. _opponent, rival, adversary, enemy_, Æ, AO, CP.
    [[adversary enemy]]
  wōl ... AO, CP.  [[AO.]]
  wrang I. n. _‘wrong,’ injustice_. [_ON._ rangr]
    [[close bracket after “rangr” invisible]]
  wrangwīs _perverse_, OEG 1770.  [[_perverse_ OEG]]
  wyrcung f. _working, work_, DR.  [[_working work_]]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, by 
John R. Clark Hall

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CONCISE ANGLO-SAXON DICTIONARY ***

***** This file should be named 31543-0.txt or 31543-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/4/31543/

Produced by Louise Hope, Zoran Stefanovic, the Germanic
Lexicon Project, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
