Project Gutenberg's Stories of the Nibelungen for Young People, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Stories of the Nibelungen for Young People

Author: Various

Editor: Gertrude R. Schottenfels

Illustrator: John C. Gilbert

Release Date: January 29, 2011 [EBook #35108]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES OF THE NIBELUNGEN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








[Illustration: THE MEETING OF SIEGFRIED AND MIMI]




Stories of the

Nibelungen

_for_

Young People

          _Arranged by_
          Gertrude R. Schottenfels
          Chicago Public Schools

          Illustrated

          Chicago
          A. Flanagan Company




          COPYRIGHT, 1905
          BY
          A. FLANAGAN COMPANY




STORIES OF THE NIBELUNGEN


             I. YOUNG SIEGFRIED                        7
            II. MIMI'S STORY                          21
           III. SIEGFRIED'S SWORD                     34
            IV. THE DEATH OF THE DRAGON               43
             V. THE STORY OF BRUNHILDA                53
            VI. GUNTHER AND KRIEMHILD                 61
           VII. SIEGFRIED'S RETURN TO IRELAND         72
          VIII. HOW GUNTHER WON HIS BRIDE             81
            IX. KRIEMHILD AND BRUNHILDA'S QUARREL     91
             X. KRIEMHILD'S REVENGE                  112




PRONOUNCING VOCABULARY

Transcriber's note: Where possible the UTF symbol was used the following
exceptions are noted:

      [+e] = e with a tack above
      [+g] = g with a tack above
      ['g] = g with an accent above

An image of the original may be found with the HTML version.

          NIBELUNGEN     nē´bĕ-lụng-[+e]n
          SANTUM         săn´tŭm
          SIEGMUND       sēg´mụnd
          NIEDERLAND     nē´der-lănd
          SIEGELINDA     sē-[+g]ĕl-in´dă
          SIEGFRIED      sēg´frid
          MIMI           mē´mē
          FAFNER         făf´ner
          ALBERICH       ăl´ber-ĭck
          WOTAN          wō´tăn
          LOKI           lō´kē
          BRUNHILDA      brụn-hīl´dă
          ISENHEIM       ē´sĕn-hīme
          GUNTHER        gŭn´ter
          HAGEN          hä´gen
          UOTA           ū-ō´tă
          KRIEMHILD      krēm´hīld
          GISELHERR      ['g]ē´sĕl-hâre
          GERNOT         gēr´nō
          ETZEL          et´zĕl
          ORTLIEB        ôrt´lēb
          RUDIGER        ru´dĭg-er
          BECHLARN       bĕck´lärn
          DIETRICH       dēt´rīck
          ETZELBURG      ĕt´zĕl-berg
          DANKWART       dänk´wert
          WALKYRIE       wŏl-kīr´ī




Stories of the Nibelungen




I

YOUNG SIEGFRIED


IN THE good old days of Long Ago, when kings had absolute power over all
their subjects, even in the matter of life and death, there dwelt in the
city of Santum, on the beautiful Rhine River, a great and good king
named Siegmund.

He was very powerful, and ruled over the kingdom of Niederland so wisely
and so well that he was loved and honored by all his people. He shared
his throne with Siegelinda, his beautiful wife, who also was noble and
kind of heart.

Siegmund and Siegelinda had one son, called Siegfried--a handsome,
well-built lad, with eyes as blue and sunny as the sky above on a fair
spring morning. He was the only child of the king and queen, but he was
more of a sorrow than a joy to them, for he was as willful and
disobedient as he was beautiful. He could not bear to be crossed in any
way, and wished that he were a man, so that he might do exactly as he
pleased.

Siegfried's parents loved him dearly in spite of his faults and all the
sorrow his wild ways caused them. But one fine morning, while the king
and queen were still asleep, he quietly took his hat, and stole out of
the castle, for he had made up his mind to go out into the wide world to
seek his fortune.

Siegfried walked through the beautiful city, and then for some time
followed a winding country road, until at length he found himself in
the midst of a dense forest. But he was not afraid; he could hear the
birds singing and calling to one another in the green trees overhead,
and now and then a rabbit or a timid squirrel ran across his pathway,
and disappeared in the bushes.

So he wandered along, quite happy. Sometimes he would come to a little
brook, winding its way through the trees and grass, and babbling and
singing among its pebbles. Across the stream he would leap, as lightly
as a hare.

Thus the day wore on, and as twilight gathered, he began to feel very
tired and hungry. He was just beginning to wonder what he should do,
when he noticed that he was nearing the edge of the forest, and a little
farther on what should he see but a blacksmith's shop among the bushes.

In the doorway stood the smith himself in his leathern apron--a little,
odd, misshapen dwarf named Mimi. He looked in wonder at the beautiful
boy, who smiled upon him in a friendly way, and said:

"Good-evening. I am almost dead with thirst and hunger; will you not
take me in, and let me be your helper?"

Mimi was about to say no, when he chanced to look at Siegfried the
second time. He noticed how strong and well built the boy was; so he
said:

"I am not really in need of a helper, for in this out-of-the-way place
there is very little work to be done; but if you wish to learn my
trade, I am willing to give you a trial."

Siegfried was happy to hear this, and with a hearty relish he ate the
coarse brown bread and bowl of milk which Mimi brought to him.

The next morning the blacksmith showed Siegfried how to blow the
bellows, and swing the sledge-hammer, and also how to shape a horseshoe.

"Now, you try it," he said, laying a red-hot piece of iron on the
anvil.

Siegfried was eager to try. He raised the hammer above his head, and
brought it down with such force that the iron flew to pieces and the
anvil was buried in the ground.

Mimi was very angry. He gave the boy a box on the ear that nearly
knocked him over. Now, Siegfried was a king's son, and never before in
all his life had any one but his parents dared to punish him. Therefore
he was indignant, and without giving Mimi a moment's warning, he seized
the dwarf by the collar and dashed him to the ground.

When Mimi came to his senses, he was almost dead with pain and fright.
He made up his mind then and there that he would have his revenge, but
he knew he was no match for Siegfried in strength; so he picked himself
up, and pretended that he was not in the least angry. After a while he
sent Siegfried to fetch a basket of coal from the colliery, which was
near a great linden tree in the forest. Under this tree dwelt a
terrible monster, and Mimi hoped that the huge beast would make an end
of the lad.

As Siegfried reached the tree, out rushed the monster, with open jaws,
ready to devour him. But the boy nimbly sprang aside, and uprooting a
tree which stood near, he brought it down with such force on the
monster's back that the huge creature was dazed by the blow, and lay
writhing in pain.

Then quick as thought, Siegfried pulled up tree after tree, and piled
them high above the struggling monster, pinning him fast to the earth.
Thus he slowly crushed the terrible beast to death.

As he stood there watching, a pool of blood oozed slowly out from under
the pile of trees. He dipped his finger in it without thinking, and was
surprised and delighted to find that his finger had become as hard as
horn, and that he could neither scratch nor pierce it.

"What a fine thing!" thought the lad. "I will bathe myself in the pool,
and then nothing on earth can harm me."

Accordingly, he quickly undressed and bathed himself in the pool; but as
he was stooping over, a broad leaf from the linden tree fell upon his
back, between the shoulders, and the spot where it lay was not touched
by the monster's blood. Siegfried knew nothing of the leaf. "Now," said
he to himself, "I am safe; neither sword nor spear can wound me." Then
he cut off the monster's head, filled Mimi's basket with coal, and
carried both back to the smithy.

Mimi could hardly believe his eyes when Siegfried appeared; he began to
fear the wonderful strength of this half-grown boy, and to hate him with
a deadly hatred. However, he was far too wise to let Siegfried know his
feelings, and so he praised the lad's courage highly. But he at once
began to think of another plan to get rid of him.

That night, while they were sitting together before the fire, Mimi
said:

"I know of an adventure which would just suit you, Siegfried. If you
succeed in it, it will make you famous all over the world, and you will
be very rich."

The boy was eager to be off at once, but the dwarf declared that
Siegfried must first listen to a long, strange story. Mimi bade him give
good heed to what he was about to hear.




II

MIMI'S STORY


MY FATHER was a dwarf, and belonged to a race of dwarfs called the
Nibelungs. He had three sons, Fafner, Otto, and myself. Fafner was the
eldest; I was the youngest. Otto, my second brother, was very fond of
fishing, and liked nothing better than to spend whole days at the sport.

My father had a magic cap called a tarnhelm. Any one who put this cap on
could make himself invisible, or assume any form he desired. Otto would
borrow this tarnhelm, and assuming the form of an otter, he would go to
a waterfall near our home to fish. He would go right into the water, and
catching the fish in his mouth, would lay them down on the bank, one
after another, until he had enough. Then he would become himself once
more and would carry the fish home for supper.

Near this waterfall there lived another dwarf, named Alberich, who also
belonged to the race of the Nibelungs. He possessed a great treasure of
gold, which he had captured from the nymphs of the Rhine. The father of
the nymphs, the God of the Rhine, had entrusted the treasure to their
care.

Alberich gained possession of the Rhine gold, but in doing so he lost
everything which helps to make life beautiful. Like my brother, he was
very fond of fishing, and taking the form of a huge pike, he would go
with Otto to the waterfall, and fish all day.

One day Wotan, the King of the Gods, was wandering through the forest
with Loki, the God of Fire. They were both very tired and hungry, and as
they came near the waterfall, what should they spy but an otter in the
water, with a large salmon in its mouth. Here was a chance not to be
missed.

Seizing a big stone, Loki hurled it with all his might at the otter,
killing it instantly. Then they carried it to my father's house, and
begged for a night's lodging.

As soon as my father saw the otter, he told them that they had killed
his son. Both Wotan and Loki were very sorry to hear this, and regretted
that they could not restore my brother to life. To make up to my father
for what they had done, they agreed to fill the otter skin with gold,
and also to cover the outside of it with the same precious metal. Then
Wotan sent Loki out in search of gold.

Now Loki knew that the dwarf Alberich possessed the Rhine gold; so he
hastened to the waterfall, and demanded the entire treasure.

At first Alberich refused to part with the gold; but Loki threatened to
kill him unless he gave it up. So Alberich unwillingly gave the treasure
to Loki--all except a ring of gold, which he kept hidden in his hand.
But the god's eyes were sharp, and he saw what Alberich had done.

Now this ring was a magic ring, and whoever owned it might claim all the
gold in all the rivers and mountains upon earth. Alberich believed that
if he kept it he could some day get back his treasure through its magic
power.

Loki commanded him to give it up, and the dwarf refused to do so. Seeing
that words were useless, the god snatched it from Alberich's hand, and
started off. Alberich fell into a terrible fury, and cried:

"A curse upon the gold! Death to all its possessors!"

But Loki had obtained that which he set out to get. The gold was not to
be his, and he cared nothing for the dwarf and his curses. He only
laughed at Alberich, and hastened with his burden to my father's house.

When Wotan saw the gold ring, he was so pleased with its beauty that he
placed it on his finger, intending to keep it for himself. Then they
filled the otter's skin with gold, and also covered it over, according
to their promise. When they had finished, my father discovered one spot
on its head upon which there was no gold. He insisted upon having this
covered up, and since there was no more gold to be had, Wotan
unwillingly took the ring from his finger, and placed it there.

Loki was displeased, and cried:

"Now, you ingrate, you have the most enormous gold treasure in the
world, and I hope you are satisfied! But remember what I say: The gold
will prove your ruin, and it will also cause your son to fill an early
grave."

Then the gods took their departure.

Fafner and I asked our father to give us each a share of the gold; but
he only laughed in a disagreeable way, and declared his dead son was far
more precious to him than were his living sons. He said that every hair
on Otto's head was dear to him. Then he ran after us with a stone club,
and swore that he would kill us if we said another word. We said no
more, and crept away in fear.

[Illustration: "FLEE FOR YOUR LIFE ERE I SMITE YOU DEAD"]

But that night as my father lay asleep, Fafner stole into his room and
slew him. Then I came forward, and told my brother that I had witnessed
his evil deed, and demanded that he give me half of the gold. But he
turned upon me in a blind rage, and cried:

"Flee for your life ere I smite you dead!"

I fled in fear, without another word. Then Fafner put on my father's
tarnhelm and escaped with his treasure to the heath, where he hid it in
a cave among the rocks. But, fearful lest it be taken from him, he
assumed the form of a frightful dragon, that he might protect it better.

And there he lies day and night, guarding the entrance of the cave, and
leaves it only when he goes to drink at a neighboring spring. No one has
dared attack him, for no one has the strength to match him.




III

SIEGFRIED'S SWORD


WHEN Mimi had finished his story, he looked at Siegfried, who had been
drinking in every word with breathless interest, and asked:

"Well, my lad, what do you think of that? Do you think you could kill
the dragon?"

Siegfried answered, with shining eyes:

"Come, Mimi, forge me a mighty sword, and lead the way to Fafner's
cave, and I will show you what I can do."

So Mimi set to work to fashion a sword for Siegfried. It was to be the
strongest, sharpest one that man had ever made. The dwarf worked day and
night until it was finished.

When he gave it to Siegfried, the boy examined it carefully, shook his
head as though in doubt, and then strode to the anvil. He struck the
iron one powerful blow with the sword, and the weapon lay in pieces.

Mimi told him not to worry, and at once set to work upon some of his
most finely tempered steel, resolved to make a sword that would be a
match for Siegfried's unheard-of strength.

But when it was finished, Siegfried took it as he had taken the first,
and in a moment the blade was shattered on the anvil. Then he grew angry
and rushed at the dwarf, crying:

"Oh! you worthless fellow, get you hence or I will kill you!"

Mimi was badly frightened, and hid himself behind the fireplace not
knowing what might happen next. But after a while Siegfried's anger
began to cool; then Mimi emerged from his hiding-place, and Siegfried
saw that he held something in each hand. When the dwarf came close
enough, the lad saw that he carried two halves of a splendid sword.

This Mimi declared was none other than the sword Wotan had carried on
the day upon which Otto was killed. "And," he continued, "if I can but
weld it together, you will have the finest sword that ever a hero
wielded." Siegfried could scarcely wait until Mimi finished the work, so
anxious was he to try the weapon.

[Illustration: THE MIGHTY SWORD WAS UNHURT]

At length it was ready, and he seized it, crying: "Now for the test! Now
for the test!" Then he raised the mighty blade high above his head, and
brought it down with all his strength upon the anvil. The whole house
shook and trembled, and the anvil was split in two, but the
weapon--the mighty sword that Wotan himself had flourished--was
unhurt.

And now Mimi was thoroughly frightened, for he thought that Siegfried
must be Thor himself. But he hid his fear, and cried:

"Avenge me, Siegfried! Slay this dragon, and one-half of the Rhine gold
shall be yours."

"Lead the way," the lad replied, "and I will make short work of him."

So Mimi started for the heath, and Siegfried followed him joyfully.

When they drew near the place, Mimi pointed out a wide, blackened trail
leading through the grass. This, he said, had been made by Fafner, for
it was the path the dragon took each day when he went to the spring to
drink. The dwarf told the boy that Fafner spouted flames to the right
and left as he went along, and threshed the grass with his monstrous
tail at every step.

Then he advised Siegfried to dig a deep pit, hide himself in it, and as
the dragon crawled over it, to pierce him to the heart from underneath.
Siegfried thought the plan a good one, and proceeded at once to dig.

He did not hear Mimi chuckling to himself, behind his back. For Mimi was
bent upon destroying him, and knew that as soon as he had killed the
monster, its blood would fill the pit, and drown him. Therefore the
dwarf rejoiced. He withdrew to a safe distance, and hid himself, to
await the coming of the dragon, which he greatly feared.




IV

THE DEATH OF THE DRAGON


AS SIEGFRIED was digging, he became aware of a tall one-eyed stranger,
clad in a long gray cloak, who was standing near by, watching him
intently. The stranger inquired what Siegfried was doing, and upon being
told, earnestly advised the youth to dig several pits, each opening out
of the other, so that he might escape the flow of blood which would
otherwise drown him.

Siegfried was very grateful for the advice, and began to act upon it at
once. Then Wotan (for the one-eyed stranger was none other than the god)
disappeared from view. When he was through digging, Siegfried heaped
brush and weeds above the first pit, so that it might not be noticed,
and getting down into it, awaited the coming of the dragon.

He had not long to wait. Of a sudden, a great noise, like the tramping
of a thousand horses, fell upon his ear. Then came a roaring as of the
sea, and he saw the huge monster come slowly along, thrashing the earth
with its great tail, and spouting flames to the left and the right.

On and on it came, until he could feel its breath hot above his face. He
firmly grasped his sword, and gave one swift upward thrust, quickly
withdrawing it, and then he nimbly leaped into the next pit, followed by
a rush of blood, and then through the next, and so on, till he reached
safe ground.

When he went back to the first pit, he found the dragon writhing and
groaning in its death agony. As soon as it saw him, it cried out, for it
still retained the power of human speech:

"Oh! you unlucky one, the gold will prove your ruin as it has mine. A
curse is on it. Who has it is accursed!"

Saying this, the creature died.

[Illustration: "THE GOLD WILL PROVE YOUR RUIN!"]

Then Siegfried carefully cleaned his sword, and replaced it in its
sheath, and as he did so, he noticed some blood upon his hand. He
licked it off, and no sooner had it touched his tongue, than a strange
thing happened. He could understand everything which the birds overhead
were saying. He stood still and listened, and what was his astonishment
to find that they were actually talking to him!

One told him that Mimi was untrue to him, and was constantly plotting
his death; that even at that very moment the dwarf was approaching with
a poisoned drink which he would offer to Siegfried, so that he might not
have to keep his promise of sharing the Rhine gold. The bird advised
him to kill the dwarf.

Sure enough, at that very moment Mimi came forward, praising Siegfried's
bravery, and offering him the poisoned drink in the most friendly
manner, smiling deceitfully all the while. Our hero turned upon him in
anger, and forced him to drain the cup himself, whereupon the wretched
dwarf fell to earth, lifeless.

Then the birds told Siegfried to enter the dragon's cave, and get the
ring and the tarnhelm, the possession of which would make him
all-powerful. This he did, and then he rolled the dragon's enormous body
to the entrance of the cave, where the Rhine gold still lay, and sealed
up the entrance with it.

As he stood there, wondering what he should do next, he heard the birds
singing of a mountain far away, where a maiden named Brunhilda lay in an
enchanted sleep, surrounded by a ring of magic flames. Here she must
slumber till there should appear a man strong and brave enough to dash
through the flames and waken her with a kiss.

Siegfried determined to journey to the mountain. So he returned to the
smithy, and saddled Mimi's horse, which was a strong, faithful creature,
and then he rode away to seek the sleeping maiden.

Many days and nights he wandered, and at length, early one morning as he
ascended the highlands, he saw a rosy glow in the distance, which grew
ever brighter and brighter. "The rising sun," he said to himself, but
he knew that it was not the rising sun. On and on he rode, and ever
brighter and brighter grew the sky, until at length he came upon the
flames themselves, and he knew that he had reached his journey's end.




V

THE STORY OF BRUNHILDA


AS SIEGFRIED drew nearer, he could hear the crackling of the flames, and
when his horse saw the fire, the animal reared up on its hind legs, and
snorted in terror. But Siegfried knew no fear. Putting spurs to his
horse, he boldly forced it through the flames, and, lo! both horse and
rider passed through unharmed.

Before Siegfried's eyes was a wondrous sight. On the mountain stood a
castle, the strangest ever seen, for it was built entirely of green
marble, as were all the buildings round it; and there, on the grassy
slope before the castle, lay a young warrior, clad in shining armor,
with a helmet on his head.

[Illustration: PUTTING SPURS TO HIS HORSE, HE BOLDLY FORCED IT THROUGH
THE FLAMES]

Siegfried went up to him, to ask him where he might find the maiden. But
the warrior was sunk in slumber, and made no reply when Siegfried spoke.
Siegfried shook him roughly, to waken him, but he still slept on. Then
Siegfried opened the young man's visor and removed his helmet. What
was his surprise to find, within, the long fair hair and rosy face of a
beautiful woman!

This, then, was Brunhilda; it could be no other. Bending over her, he
pressed a kiss lightly on her lips. Immediately Brunhilda awoke, and
thanked the young hero for breaking the magic spell which bound her.
Then, as they sat together in the marble palace, Brunhilda told her
story.

She was one of Wotan's eight daughters who were called Walkyries. They
were beautiful goddesses of immense size and strength, and used to
follow Wotan when he went into battle. Occasionally, when two knights or
two countries battled against each other, they would award the palm of
victory to one or the other. It was also their duty to carry all slain
heroes to Walhalla, the beautiful palace of Wotan.

One day Brunhilda disobeyed her father's orders, and awarded the victory
to the hero whom Wotan wished overthrown. Wotan was very angry, and as
a punishment he forbade her to dwell among the gods and goddesses, and
declared that never again should she set foot in Walhalla. Furthermore,
he would cause her to wed a mortal man, thus becoming a mortal woman,
instead of a goddess.

Brunhilda was overcome with grief, as were all of her sisters. They all
pleaded with Wotan not to punish her in this way. But he had already
pronounced sentence upon her, and could not retract his word. Then
Brunhilda wept piteously, and begged him at least to grant that her
husband might be a hero. This he promised, and then disclosed his plan.

He would sink her in a magic sleep, and would order Loki, the fire-god,
to kindle some magic flames, which were to encircle her. She was to
slumber until awakened by a man brave enough to go through fire for her
sake. "And," continued Wotan, "of course only a hero would show such
courage." Then he assured her that when the hero came he should be
unharmed by the ring of fire.

And so, with streaming eyes, Brunhilda bade her sisters a long farewell.
Never again, so long as she lived, would she behold them. Wotan was
deeply touched when he saw her grief, and with a last tender kiss upon
her beautiful brow, he laid her on the grassy slope, and pronounced the
magic words which bound her.




VI

GUNTHER AND KRIEMHILD


SIEGFRIED remained for a long time with Brunhilda at Isenheim (which was
the ancient name for Ireland), where all the buildings were of green
marble. He then started for home, promising her that he would return and
marry her, as soon as he had visited his parents, whom he now felt he
had treated very cruelly.

Brunhilda replied that she too thought that he ought to visit his
mother and father, but that he must promise to return as soon as he had
done so. He readily promised, and sealed his pledge by placing his magic
ring upon her finger. Then he set out for Niederland.

On the way thither, he had to pass through the city of Worms in
Burgundy. Now in this city dwelt a powerful king called Gunther, who
ruled over all Burgundy. He had an uncle named Hagen, who was his dead
father's brother, and who was also Gunther's most valued adviser on all
occasions. Gunther was so great and mighty that four and twenty kings
paid him tribute.

He had a sister, named Kriemhild, who was noted far and wide for her
wondrous beauty. Once Kriemhild had had a strange dream: She thought
that she was out hunting with her pet falcon, and that two fierce eagles
swooped down from the sky, and killed the bird before her eyes.

Now in these olden times people were very superstitious, and believed
that every dream had a meaning. Kriemhild related her dream to her
mother, Uota, and asked what it meant. Uota replied:

"The falcon signifies a noble man who will win you for his bride; but
the two eagles stand for two powerful enemies, who will cause his
death."

Then Kriemhild was very sad, and declared that she did not wish to marry
any one, as it would bring her only sorrow.

Not long after this Siegfried arrived at Worms, and although he knew no
one in all the city, everybody was anxious to learn who he was, he was
so handsome and noble looking. Hagen advised Gunther to make friends
with him, for he thought it very likely that the stranger might prove to
be Siegfried, whose fame was spreading fast.

Hagen related how Siegfried had killed the linden-monster, slain the
dragon, won the Rhine gold, and gained possession of the magic cap and
ring. When Uota heard all this, she determined that Siegfried should
marry her beautiful daughter. When he entered the castle at Worms,
Gunther received him cordially, and made haste to offer him both food
and drink. Siegfried accepted both gratefully, for he was hungry and
thirsty. Uota hastily prepared a magic potion, and no sooner had the
hero drunk it than all memory of the past, Brunhilda included, faded
from his mind.

[Illustration: UOTA GIVES SIEGFRIED THE MAGIC POTION]

Siegfried remained at Worms for one whole year, and in all that time he
never once got a glimpse of Kriemhild, although the fame of her beauty
reached him from every side. She, however, had seen him from her window
while he was tilting with her brother's knights, and she thought that
never before had she seen any one so brave and handsome.

Not long after this, the Danes and the Saxons declared war against
Gunther. He quickly gathered together his army, and set out to battle
with them. His two younger brothers, Giselherr and Gernot, went with
him, and Siegfried accompanied him as his body-guard.

And now began anxious days and nights for Kriemhild. She was filled with
dread lest her brothers or Siegfried be slain. She eagerly awaited
tidings of every battle. She heard that the Saxons and Danes were being
hard pressed, and also that the most brave and reckless warrior among
all the Burgundian hosts was her brother's guest and body-guard.

Not long after this, the Burgundians were victorious, and captured both
the Danish and the Saxon king. This ended the war, and Gunther and all
his troops returned to Worms, where the king held a great feast to
celebrate his victory. And here for the first time Siegfried saw
Kriemhild, and he thought her the most beautiful woman he had ever seen.

He was almost afraid to speak to her, so wondrous was her beauty, but
she thanked him very prettily and gratefully for all that he had done
for her brother; and when he replied that everything he had done had
been done for her sake, she smiled and was content. Siegfried had fallen
deeply in love with her, and made up his mind to spare no effort to win
her for his bride.




VII

SIEGFRIED RETURNS TO IRELAND


MEANWHILE, in Ireland, Brunhilda was eagerly awaiting Siegfried's
return. Days grew into weeks, weeks lengthened into months, and still he
did not come. At first she could not believe that he had deserted her.
She would look at the beautiful ring which he had given her, and all her
faith and trust in him would return.

But when months slowly lengthened into years, and the years passed one
after another, she began to give up the hope of ever seeing him again.

Now, as I have said before, Brunhilda was very beautiful, and soon
suitors began flocking around her, anxious to win her hand in marriage.
But Brunhilda loved Siegfried very dearly and had no desire to marry any
one else. Therefore she declared that whoever sought to marry her must
match his strength with hers; if he were victorious, she would wed him,
but if he failed, he should lose his head in forfeit, according to the
custom of these olden days.

Many gallant suitors came, entered the contest, failed and lost their
heads, for Brunhilda was a Walkyrie, and more than a match in strength
for any man. She did not like to kill her lovers, but they persisted in
coming, and she continued to do her best at every trial.

Meanwhile the fame of her strength and beauty traveled afar, and reached
Gunther at Worms. He determined to journey to Isenheim, and enter the
lists against her. Accordingly he went to Siegfried, and asked aid of
him. Siegfried replied:

"I will gladly help you, if you, on your part, will help me win the hand
of your beautiful sister."

Gunther was very grateful for the aid Siegfried had given him in the
late Saxon war. So he promised that on the day Brunhilda arrived in
Worms he would give him Kriemhild for his bride. Siegfried was
satisfied, and agreed to travel to Ireland with Gunther, as his vassal,
and to present his petition to Brunhilda.

Then they arrayed themselves in costly garments and set sail, and after
a twelve-day voyage, they reached the coast of Ireland. When Siegfried
beheld the green palaces of marble, he felt a vague uneasiness, for it
all had a strangely familiar look. Where had he seen this place before?
He remembered it dimly, as in a dream.

When he entered Brunhilda's palace, she advanced to meet him, with both
hands outstretched, crying:

"Siegfried, is it indeed you, and have you come to tilt with me?"

He looked at her with the eyes of a stranger, and replied:

"I come to represent Gunther, King of Burgundy. He wishes to sue for
your heart and hand. He is my lord; I am his vassal, and have come to do
his bidding."

Brunhilda was sorely grieved and perplexed; she could not in the least
understand Siegfried's behavior. Surely it was he who had aroused her
from her magic sleep, and surely it was he who had placed the beautiful
ring upon her hand, vowing that he would return and claim her for his
bride. But as he continued to look at her as though he had never seen
her before, she felt that she must give him a reply.

And as she had no reasonable excuse for refusing his request, she said
that Gunther might enter the lists with her. She felt sure that he, too,
would be overthrown. Siegfried thanked her gravely for her kindness,
and made haste to carry her reply back to Gunther.

He then disclosed his plan to aid Gunther in the undertaking. Gunther
was to appear clad in armor and mounted upon Siegfried's horse, the one
which had belonged to Mimi; then he, Siegfried, would put on his
tarnhelm and become invisible; Gunther was to ride boldly into the
field, and go through all the necessary motions, while Siegfried, unseen
by the others, would do all the actual fighting. Gunther said he
considered the plan a capital one, and declared that Siegfried was as
clever as he was brave.




VIII

HOW GUNTHER WON HIS BRIDE


THE day of the tournament dawned bright and fair. The field was crowded
with lovely women and brave knights. Twelve men now appeared, bearing an
immense round stone, which was so large that it took all their united
strength to handle it. They set it down in that part of the field where
the contest was to take place.

At length all was ready. From the castle issued forth the warrior-king
and the warrior-maiden. They were clad in glistening armor, and mounted
on prancing chargers. The signal was given, and then began a test of
strength such as had never before been witnessed.

[Illustration: BRUNHILDA WAS THROWN TO THE GROUND]

Brunhilda seized her javelin, and hurled it with such force that when
Siegfried caught it upon Gunther's shield the shield was shattered into
pieces. Then Siegfried, still invisible, grasped Gunther's javelin, and
hurled it with such force at Brunhilda that she was thrown to the
ground. She was overcome with surprise and anger; never before had such
a thing befallen her.

Quickly recovering herself, she sprang to her feet, and grasping the
huge stone which twelve men had found hard to carry, she whirled it
deftly thrice around her head, and then threw it far into the distance.
Then, while the people sat spell-bound, she leaped after it, and sprang
lightly over the stone.

"Now," thought she to herself, "surely no one can do more than that."

But she had reckoned without Siegfried. Hastily seizing the stone, he
hurled it much farther than Brunhilda had thrown it, and not to be
outdone by her, he grasped Gunther firmly under the arms, and sprang
with him over the stone, landing much farther beyond it than she had.

Then a mighty shout from thousands of throats rent the air, and while
the people were crowding around, hailing Gunther as victor, Siegfried
tore off his tarnhelm, and took his place among the crowd.

And now what could Brunhilda do? She had publicly proclaimed that she
would marry any man whose strength was greater than her own, so sure had
she felt of her power. She would not break her word, and so with a
sorrowful heart she made ready to travel back to Worms with Gunther.

At Worms Kriemhild joyfully accepted Siegfried's hand, and there was a
grand double wedding, at which all Burgundy was present. The festivities
lasted fourteen days.

One evening, while Gunther and his bride were sitting together, Gunther
noticed tears on Brunhilda's lashes, and asked what was troubling her.
She replied that she was grieving that his sister had married his
vassal. This was not the truth. She was feeling sad and lonely because
the man she loved so well had taken Kriemhild for his bride.

Gunther told her not to worry, as he could explain all that to her, and
promised to do so at some future time. He said that Siegfried was
greater than she knew.

After the wedding, Siegfried and Kriemhild journeyed to Santum, to visit
Siegmund and Siegelinda, whom he had left in his youth. They were
overjoyed to see him, and listened with breathless interest to all he
had to tell. They knew all about the dragon, and the Rhine gold, and the
magic cap which he had won, for the fame of his wondrous deeds had
traveled far and wide. And now, strange to tell, Siegfried had recovered
the memory of almost all his past; only Brunhilda and the magic ring
remained forgotten.

After the young couple had been at Santum for some time, Siegmund
withdrew from his throne, and made Siegfried and Kriemhild the rulers of
the kingdom. The people of Niederland hailed the hero with delight,
although they grieved to give up their old king and queen, who had won
the hearts of all their subjects by their wisdom and kindness.




IX

KRIEMHILD AND BRUNHILDA'S QUARREL


YEARS passed by, and Brunhilda had come to love her husband very dearly.
They had one child, a little boy whom they had named Siegfried.
Kriemhild, meanwhile, had been living very happily with her husband in
Niederland. They had had two great sorrows, the death of the old king
and that of the queen, and all the people of Niederland still mourned
the loss of these two.

Then there arrived one day in Niederland a messenger from the King and
Queen of Burgundy, inviting Siegfried and Kriemhild to attend a great
feast which was to be held in Worms. They accepted with pleasure.
Kriemhild was anxious to see her mother and brothers again, for she
loved them dearly. So they started for Burgundy.

For some days after they arrived in Worms everything went happily. But
then the tournaments began, and Siegfried won every honor as he had
done in days gone by, for he had lost none of his wonderful strength.
Both the queens were present at the contests, and as he overthrew one
knight after another, Kriemhild looked at him lovingly, and said that he
was the best and greatest king the world had ever seen, and that no king
could stand against him; all paid him tribute.

Brunhilda replied: "All except Gunther; next to him Siegfried is the
most powerful king on earth; but strong as your husband is, he could
never hold his own against Gunther."

Kriemhild controlled her temper, and made no reply, but that evening
when they attended vespers, Kriemhild attempted to enter the cathedral
first. Brunhilda interfered, saying:

"The wife of a vassal should never precede the wife of his lord!"

"And who says that King Siegfried is Gunther's vassal?" demanded
Kriemhild.

"I have his own word for it," Brunhilda replied. "When they first
appeared in Ireland, Siegfried approached me, saying: 'I come to
represent the King of Burgundy; I am his vassal, he is my lord.'"

Then Kriemhild lost all patience, for well she knew by what trick
Gunther had won his bride. She cried:

"And do you think that Gunther overthrew you in the tilt? Gunther only
pretended to fight. It was Siegfried, made invisible by his tarnhelm,
who did the real fighting; it was Siegfried who hurled the javelin
which unhorsed you; it was Siegfried who threw the heavy stone, and he
it was, invisible to you, but holding Gunther in his arms, who sprang
over the stone, and vanquished you," she declared.

Looking at Kriemhild's heaving breast and blazing eye, Brunhilda knew
she spoke the truth. And at the same time, there flashed across her mind
something that Gunther had once said to her about Siegfried being
greater than she knew.

[Illustration: "IT WAS SIEGFRIED WHO DID THE REAL FIGHTING"]

And now she fell into a royal rage, and her indignation knew no bounds.
There was but one way of atonement; Siegfried must die for the deceit
practiced on her. So she went to Hagen, Gunther's uncle, who had
promised always to defend her rights, and demanded Siegfried's life.

When Hagen first spoke to Gunther of the matter, Gunther would not hear
of the plan to do away with Siegfried, and vowed that no harm should
befall the man with whom he had sworn blood brothership ere they set
out for Ireland. But Brunhilda was firm in her resolve; nothing less
than his death would satisfy her honor, nor wipe out the stain of his
deceit.

And finally Gunther gave an unwilling consent. However, they could not
fall upon Siegfried, and kill him in cold blood, so Hagen made a clever
plan: they would receive a false summons to war. Accordingly, a few days
later, a messenger rode posthaste into Worms, bearing the false tidings
that the enemy was approaching.

Then everything was in great confusion, and Gunther assembled his hosts,
and set out to meet the enemy. Siegfried accompanied him, to render what
assistance he could, for he loved his kinsman as a brother. Just before
the army started on the march, Kriemhild went to Hagen, and begged him
to watch over her husband, and see to it that no one attacked him from
behind, for she explained that Siegfried could not be wounded anywhere
except in the spot on his back where the linden-leaf had fallen.

Hagen readily promised. He craftily suggested that Kriemhild should sew
some mark above the spot, so that he might know exactly when danger
threatened. Kriemhild fell in at once with his plan; with loving care
she stitched a white silk cross upon her husband's clothes. Then Gunther
and his troops rode away.

After they had ridden some distance, they were met by another
messenger, with the false tidings that the enemy had begun a retreat.

Gunther appeared to be overjoyed at the news, and suggested that a
mighty hunt should be held, to celebrate the occasion. The troops were
dispatched back to Worms, and the royal party set out for the chase,
which they greatly enjoyed.

When the dinner-horn sounded for the hunters to assemble to their meal,
Siegfried appeared, dragging a live bear behind him. He was received
with shouts of applause. They at once proceeded to kill and roast the
bear. Every one was in the best of spirits, and as hungry as could be;
but when they sat down to eat, it was discovered that the wine was
missing; Hagen had purposely left it behind.

Siegfried, especially, was very thirsty, and playfully chided Hagen for
forgetting so important an article. Thereupon Hagen said that he knew of
a spring, not far away, where Siegfried might quench his thirst, and
dared him to run a race there. Siegfried accepted the challenge, and
easily won the race, as Hagen knew he would.

He had laid aside his weapons, and was already kneeling to drink, when
Hagen came up behind him. "Ha, ha," laughed Siegfried, "I have won the
race, and am therefore entitled to the first drink."

[Illustration: "THE HERO HURLED IT WITH ALL HIS MIGHT AT HAGEN"]

"You are," answered Hagen quietly, picking up Siegfried's sword, and
poising it above the spot where Kriemhild had sewn the white cross;
and without saying another word, he drove it home with such force that
the point of it pierced Siegfried's breast.

In agony, the hero sprang to his feet, and seizing his shield, hurled it
with all his might at Hagen, throwing him to the ground. Then he, too,
fell, and the blood from his wounds stained the grass a deep crimson;
and thus died Siegfried, the great and mighty hero, calling upon
Kriemhild with his last breath to avenge his foul murder.

Then they placed his body on his shield and carried it back to Worms,
and laid it at Kriemhild's door. Next morning, as she was going to mass,
her waiting-maid, who preceded her on the way out, suddenly gave a
scream, and cried:

"Go back, go back, and do not come this way, for here lies the body of a
dead warrior."

But Kriemhild's heart misgave her, and she would not go back, and when
she saw the body she uttered a great cry, for she knew instantly that
it was Siegfried.

She bade the servants carry it inside, and lay it on his bed, and her
grief knew no bounds. Then she sent for Gunther, and wildly accused him
of the deed, and he as wildly denied his guilt. Then she said:

"If you are indeed innocent, you need not fear to stand in the presence
of the dead."

Gunther was not afraid, and went with her into the death chamber. While
they were standing there, looking at Siegfried, Hagen suddenly entered
the room, and lo! all the dead man's wounds began to bleed afresh.

She knew by this sign that Hagen was guilty of her husband's death, and
she swore undying vengeance. She supposed that he had killed him to gain
possession of his vast riches, and she determined to spoil his plan. But
Hagen was as crafty as he was clever, and so he induced Brunhilda to
give him the gold ring as a reward for his services to her. She knew
nothing of its great value, and she hated it now because it reminded her
of the false Siegfried. So she willingly gave it to Hagen, whom she
considered her greatest benefactor.

No sooner had he the ring in his possession than he journeyed to
Niederland, and there by its magic power he gained possession of the
Rhine gold. It took him fourteen days and nights to remove the treasure
from the cave on the heath. He then sunk it in the Rhine, where he
intended to leave it hidden until after Kriemhild's death; but no
sooner had he flung it into the river than the Rhine nymphs seized it
for their own, determined to guard it so well this time that never again
should their father, the God of the Rhine, have occasion to bewail its
loss, and their unfaithfulness.

When Kriemhild reached Niederland, and found that the gold had been
stolen from Fafner's cave, she was even more determined than before that
she would be revenged upon Hagen.




X

KRIEMHILD'S REVENGE


YEARS passed by, and Kriemhild still mourned the loss of her noble
husband. Often and often she recalled the dream that she had had in the
days before Siegfried appeared in Worms. How truly her mother had
interpreted its meaning!

And now she had but one wish on earth, and that was to avenge his death.
She was not so beautiful as she had once been; constant tears had
washed the brightness from her eyes, and her cheeks were pale.

One day there appeared in the castle a noble-looking stranger, who asked
to speak with the queen. He was admitted to her presence, and she asked
him his name, and also to what she owed the honor of his presence at her
court.

He replied: "I am Rudiger of Bechlarn, of the court of Etzelburg. I have
come hither at the request of my master, Etzel the King of the Huns, to
ask your hand for him in marriage."

At first Kriemhild refused to listen to him. What had she to do with
love and marriage? All the love of her heart lay buried in Siegfried's
grave; all the joy of her life had vanished when he died. All that she
wished for was revenge, and after that to share her dear one's tomb.

But Rudiger would not take no for an answer. Then, when he found that
revenge was what she longed for, he saw his opportunity. He told her
that if she would but become King Etzel's wife, he, himself, would
promise to avenge her every wrong, not only those which might arise in
time to come, but even those which she had suffered in the past.

Here at last was the chance she had so patiently awaited, and she
eagerly seized it. She consented to become Etzel's bride, and Rudiger
willingly swore undying fealty to her and her cause. And so she returned
with him to Etzelburg, where the marriage was celebrated with royal
pomp and ceremony.

King Etzel loved Kriemhild dearly, and was very kind to her. She was
truly grateful to him, but she could not forget Siegfried, not even when
a dear little son came to her. The child was named Ortlieb. And so time
sped by, until the little boy's fifth birthday.

Kriemhild had now been in Etzelburg thirteen years, and in all this time
she had neither seen nor heard from her home and kindred. One day she
went to her husband, and told him that she was becoming ashamed of
being a stranger in a foreign land without any kinspeople of her own.
She said she thought it was high time that some of her family should
come to visit her, and begged him to make a feast, and invite them all
to be present.

Her slightest wish was Etzel's law, and so he willingly granted her
request. He at once dispatched a messenger with the invitation. Just
before the messenger set out, Kriemhild went to him and told him to be
sure that every one of her relatives accepted the invitation. In this
way, she hoped to get her uncle Hagen within reach, without rousing any
one's suspicions.

Now, when it had become known in Worms that Etzel had asked Kriemhild to
marry him, Hagen had been filled with alarm. He told Gunther that it
might mean great disaster for them, should Kriemhild marry Etzel, as he
was one of the most powerful kings of the time.

But now thirteen years had passed, and they had neither seen nor heard
from the Hunnish king and queen, and Gunther no longer feared trouble
from that source. Then came Kriemhild's invitation, and for seven days
it was discussed by the royal family at Worms.

Should they accept it? Gunther and his two brothers, Giselherr and
Gernot, were anxious to do so, for they thought it meant that their
sister wished to be at peace with her family. Gunther, particularly,
was eager to be friendly, as he loved Kriemhild dearly.

Hagen alone had misgivings, and well might he dread meeting her, for he
knew how sorely she had suffered at his hands. He sullenly refused to
go, until Gernot at length cried out:

"I know what ails Hagen! He is thinking of Siegfried's death, and fears
to go to Etzelburg."

Hagen did not wish to be thought afraid, so he consented to go, and they
all prepared to accompany the messenger to Etzel's court on the
following day--all except Uota, who was getting too old and feeble to
leave home.

That night Uota had a dreadful dream; she thought that all the birds lay
dead in the forests, and when she awoke, she hated to see her sons go,
for she knew that her dream meant danger to them.

However, they set out, accompanied by one thousand brave men. On their
way to Etzel's country, they came to a river that they had to cross; but
they found they could not cross it on horseback, as it was swollen too
high. So they had to wait until a boat should appear.

While they were waiting, they chanced to see two swan-maidens, who had
come to the stream to bathe; the maidens had laid aside their feathers,
and were playing about in the water like mermaids. Now Hagen knew they
possessed the gift of foretelling the future, and he laid a clever plan.

When they came out of the water, they found their clothes gone, and they
were very much troubled, for without their feather garments they could
not fly away. Then Hagen approached them, and said he would give their
feathers back if they would tell him what was to happen to the
Burgundians in Etzel's land. Then one of the maidens, who cared nothing
for him or his friends, and thought only of regaining her clothes,
without which she could never reach her home in the sky, replied:

"Everything is fair and clear for the men of Burgundy. Sail on, sail
on. You have naught to fear."

Hagen was delighted, and returned their garments with a light heart. The
maidens quickly put their feathers on, and spread their wings in flight;
but as they rose into the blue sky the second one cried to Hagen:

"Turn back, turn back; death and bloodshed await you in Etzelburg! Only
one, of all your number, will ever live to see your native land again."

Then they disappeared in the azure depths above, and Hagen was left
with a heavy heart.

At length the Burgundians secured a vessel, and embarked. They were met
on the other side of the river by Dietrich von Bern, one of the lords of
the Hunnish court, who greeted Hagen with these words of friendly
warning:

"Kriemhild still mourns for Siegfried's loss."

But poor Hagen had no way of turning back; he had to accompany the
others, whether he would or no. And sure enough, when he came into
Kriemhild's presence she drew herself up haughtily, and asked:

"And pray, who invited you here, Sir Hagen? Who bid you to this feast?"

Hagen replied that he was a retainer of Gunther's, and that wherever
Gunther went, he, too, must go; but her attitude and greeting showed him
plainly that she had not forgiven him for his treachery.

[Illustration: "AND, PRAY, WHO INVITED YOU HERE, SIR HAGEN?"]

Kriemhild greeted her brothers very cordially, and seemed rejoiced to
see them, and for a few days all went well. Then came the banquet, in
the midst of which in rushed Dankwart, Hagen's brother, with blood
flowing from a dozen wounds, and told them that the Huns had fallen upon
Gunther's men and slain them all.

And immediately everything was in the wildest confusion. Protected by
Rudiger, Kriemhild and Etzel escaped from the banquet hall. Then ensued
a fierce battle in which all of the Huns, with the exception of
Dietrich, and all the Burgundians, except Gunther and Hagen, were
slain. Finally Dietrich vanquished these two, and bound them hand and
foot. Then he sought Kriemhild, and made her give her word of honor that
he, and he alone, should be permitted to put them to death. After that
he turned the prisoners over into her keeping. She ordered them to be
confined in separate dungeons.

Then she visited Hagen and sought by every means in her power to
discover what he had done with the Rhine gold. This he refused to tell,
saying he had taken a solemn oath never to reveal its hiding-place so
long as one of his lords remained alive. Then she said that she would
spare Gunther's life if Hagen would tell her where the gold was
secreted.

But Hagen would not tell his secret, even to save the life of his liege
lord and kinsman. And so she ordered that both of them should be
beheaded, according to the custom of these olden times. And thus at
last was Siegfried's death avenged by the once gentle and beautiful
queen.

And of all the men of Burgundy who had crossed the water to attend King
Etzel's feast, but one remained to carry the sad news back to their
native land; and that was the old chaplain of Gunther's court.
Everything had come to pass just as the swan-maiden had predicted. And
back in Burgundy, Uota sorrowfully lived out her days with none in all
that broad land to brew for her lips the cup of forgetfulness, such as
she had given Siegfried. And so we must leave her alone with her sad
memories.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Page 52, period added to end of chapter.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Stories of the Nibelungen for Young
People, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES OF THE NIBELUNGEN ***

***** This file should be named 35108-0.txt or 35108-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/1/0/35108/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
