The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fragments from The Journal of a Solitary Man, by
Nathaniel Hawthorne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Fragments from The Journal of a Solitary Man

Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne

Release Date: November, 2005 [EBook #9247]
First Posted: September 25, 2003
Last Updated: December 15, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL OF A SOLITARY MAN ***




Produced by David Widger










                 THE DOLIVER ROMANCE AND OTHER PIECES

                         TALES AND SKETCHES

                       By Nathaniel Hawthorne


             FRAGMENTS FROM THE JOURNAL OF A SOLITARY MAN




I.

My poor friend “Oberon”--[See the sketch or story entitled “The Devil in
Manuscript,” in “The Snow-Image, and other Twice-Told Tales.”]--for let
me be allowed to distinguish him by so quaint a name--sleeps with the
silent ages.  He died calmly. Though his disease was pulmonary, his life
did not flicker out like a wasted lamp, sometimes shooting up into a
strange temporary brightness; but the tide of being ebbed away, and the
noon of his existence waned till, in the simple phraseology of
Scripture, “he was not.”  The last words he said to me were, “Burn my
papers,--all that you can find in yonder escritoire; for I fear there
are some there which you may be betrayed into publishing.  I have
published enough; as for the old disconnected journal in your
possession--”  But here my poor friend was checked in his utterance by
that same hollow cough which would never let him alone.  So he coughed
himself tired, and sank to slumber.  I watched from that midnight hour
till high noon on the morrow for his waking.  The chamber was dark;
till, longing for light, I opened the window-shutter, and the broad day
looked in on the marble features of the dead.

I religiously obeyed his instructions with regard to the papers in the
escritoire, and burned them in a heap without looking into one, though
sorely tempted.  But the old journal I kept.  Perhaps in strict
conscience I ought also to have burned that; but casting my eye over
some half-torn leaves the other day, I could not resist an impulse to
give some fragments of it to the public.  To do this satisfactorily,
I am obliged to twist this thread, so as to string together into a
semblance of order my Oberon’s “random pearls.”

If anybody that holds any commerce with his fellowmen can be called
solitary, Oberon was a “solitary man.”  He lived in a small village at
some distance from the metropolis, and never came up to the city except
once in three months for the purpose of looking into a bookstore, and of
spending two hours and a half with me.  In that space of time I would
tell him all that I could remember of interest which had occurred in the
interim of his visits.  He would join very heartily in the conversation;
but as soon as the time of his usual tarrying had elapsed, he would take
up his hat and depart.  He was unequivocally the most original person I
ever knew.  His style of composition was very charming.  No tales that
have ever appeared in our popular journals have been so generally
admired as his.  But a sadness was on his spirit; and this, added to the
shrinking sensitiveness of his nature, rendered him not misanthropic,
but singularly averse to social intercourse.  Of the disease, which was
slowly sapping the springs of his life, he first became fully conscious
after one of those long abstractions in which he was wont to indulge.
It is remarkable, however, that his first idea of this sort, instead of
deepening his spirit with a more melancholy hue, restored him to a more
natural state of mind.

He had evidently cherished a secret hope that some impulse would at
length be given him, or that he would muster sufficient energy of will
to return into the world, and act a wiser and happier part than his
former one.  But life never called the dreamer forth; it was Death that
whispered him.  It is to be regretted that this portion of his old
journal contains so few passages relative to this interesting period;
since the little which he has recorded, though melancholy enough,
breathes the gentleness of a spirit newly restored to communion with its
kind.  If there be anything bitter in the following reflections, its
source is in human sympathy, and its sole object is himself.

“It is hard to die without one’s happiness; to none more so than myself,
whose early resolution it had been to partake largely of the joys of
life, but never to be burdened with its cares.  Vain philosophy!  The
very hardships of the poorest laborer, whose whole existence seems one
long toil, has something preferable to my best pleasures.

“Merely skimming the surface of life, I know nothing, by my own
experience, of its deep and warm realities.  I have achieved none of
those objects which the instinct of mankind especially prompts them to
pursue, and the accomplishment of which must therefore beget a native
satisfaction.  The truly wise, after all their speculations, will be led
into the common path, and, in homage to the human nature that pervades
them, will gather gold, and till the earth, and set out trees, and build
a house.  But I have scorned such wisdom.  I have rejected, also, the
settled, sober, careful gladness of a man by his own fireside, with
those around him whose welfare is committed to his trust and all their
guidance to his fond authority.  Without influence among serious
affairs, my footsteps were not imprinted on the earth, but lost in air;
and I shall leave no son to inherit my share of life, with a better
sense of its privileges and duties, when his father should vanish like a
bubble; so that few mortals, even the humblest and the weakest, have
been such ineffectual shadows in the world, or die so utterly as I must.
Even a young man’s bliss has not been mine.  With a thousand vagrant
fantasies, I have never truly loved, and perhaps shall be doomed to
loneliness throughout the eternal future, because, here on earth, my
soul has never married itself to the soul of woman.

“Such are the repinings of one who feels, too late, that the sympathies
of his nature have avenged themselves upon him.  They have prostrated,
with a joyless life and the prospect of a reluctant death, my selfish
purpose to keep aloof from mortal disquietudes, and be a pleasant idler
among care-stricken and laborious men.  I have other regrets, too,
savoring more of my old spirit.  The time has been when I meant to visit
every region of the earth, except the poles and Central Africa.  I had a
strange longing to see the Pyramids.  To Persia and Arabia, and all the
gorgeous East, I owed a pilgrimage for the sake of their magic tales.
And England, the land of my ancestors!  Once I had fancied that my sleep
would not be quiet in the grave unless I should return, as it were, to
my home of past ages, and see the very cities, and castles, and
battle-fields of history, and stand within the holy gloom of its
cathedrals, and kneel at the shrines of its immortal poets, there
asserting myself their hereditary countryman.  This feeling lay among the
deepest in my heart.  Yet, with this homesickness for the father-land, and
all these plans of remote travel,--which I yet believe that my peculiar
instinct impelled me to form, and upbraided me for not accomplishing,--the
utmost limit of my wanderings has been little more than six hundred miles
from my native village.  Thus, in whatever way I consider my life, or what
must be termed such, I cannot feel as if I had lived at all.

“I am possessed, also, with the thought that I have never yet discovered
the real secret of my powers; that there has been a mighty treasure
within my reach, a mine of gold beneath my feet, worthless because I
have never known how to seek for it; and for want of perhaps one
fortunate idea, I am to die

          ‘Unwept, unhonored, and unsung.’

“Once, amid the troubled and tumultuous enjoyment of my life, there was
a dreamy thought that haunted me, the terrible necessity imposed on
mortals to grow old, or die.  I could not bear the idea of losing one
youthful grace.  True, I saw other men, who had once been young and now
were old, enduring their age with equanimity, because each year
reconciled them to its own added weight.  But for myself, I felt that
age would be not less miserable, creeping upon me slowly, than if it
fell at once.  I sometimes looked in the glass, and endeavored to fancy
my cheeks yellow and interlaced with furrows, my forehead wrinkled
deeply across, the top of my head bald and polished, my eyebrows and
side-locks iron gray, and a grisly beard sprouting on my chin.
Shuddering at the picture, I changed it for the dead face of a young
mail, with dark locks clustering heavily round its pale beauty, which
would decay, indeed, but not with years, nor in the sight of men.  The
latter visage shocked me least.

“Such a repugnance to the hard conditions of long life is common to all
sensitive and thoughtful men, who minister to the luxury, the
refinements, the gayety and lightsomeness, to anything, in short, but
the real necessities of their fellow-creatures.  He who has a part in
the serious business of life, though it be only as a shoemaker, feels
himself equally respectable in youth and in age, and therefore is
content to live and look forward to wrinkles and decrepitude in their
due season.  It is far otherwise with the busy idlers of the world.  I
was particularly liable to this torment, being a meditative person in
spite of my levity.  The truth could not be concealed, nor the
contemplation of it avoided.  With deep inquietude I became aware that
what was graceful now, and seemed appropriate enough to my age of
flowers, would be ridiculous in middle life; and that the world, so
indulgent to the fantastic youth, would scorn the bearded than, still
telling love-tales, loftily ambitious of a maiden’s tears, and squeezing
out, as it were, with his brawny strength, the essence of roses.  And in
his old age the sweet lyrics of Anacreon made the girls laugh at his
white hairs the more.  With such sentiments, conscious that my part in
the drama of life was fit only for a youthful performer, I nourished a
regretful desire to be summoned early from the scene.  I set a limit to
myself, the age of twenty-five, few years indeed, but too many to be
thrown away.  Scarcely had I thus fixed the term of my mortal
pilgrimage, than the thought grew into a presentiment that, when the
space should be completed, the world would have one butterfly the less,
by my far flight.

“O, how fond I was of life, even while allotting, as my proper destiny,
an early death!  I loved the world, its cities, its villages, its grassy
roadsides, its wild forests, its quiet scenes, its gay, warm, enlivening
bustle; in every aspect, I loved the world so long as I could behold it
with young eyes and dance through it with a young heart.  The earth had
been made so beautiful, that I longed for no brighter sphere, but only
an ever-youthful eternity in this.  I clung to earth as if my beginning
and ending were to be there, unable to imagine any but an earthly
happiness, and choosing such, with all its imperfections, rather than
perfect bliss which might be alien from it.  Alas!  I had not wet known
that weariness by which the soul proves itself ethereal.”

Turning over the old journal, I open, by chance, upon a passage which
affords a signal instance of the morbid fancies to which Oberon
frequently yielded himself.  Dreams like the following were probably
engendered by the deep gloom sometimes thrown over his mind by his
reflections on death.

“I dreamed that one bright forenoon I was walking through Broadway, and
seeking to cheer myself with the warm and busy life of that far-famed
promenade.  Here a coach thundered over the pavement, and there an
unwieldy omnibus, with spruce gigs rattling past, and horsemen prancing
through all the bustle.  On the sidewalk people were looking at the rich
display of goods, the plate and jewelry, or the latest caricature ill
the bookseller’s windows; while fair ladies and whiskered gentlemen
tripped gayly along, nodding mutual recognitions, or shrinking from some
rough countryman or sturdy laborer whose contact might have ruffled
their finery.  I found myself in this animated scene, with a dim and
misty idea that it was not my proper place, or that I had ventured into
the crowd with some singularity of dress or aspect which made me
ridiculous.  Walking in the sunshine, I was yet cold as death.  By
degrees, too, I perceived myself the object of universal attention, and,
as it seemed, of horror and affright.  Every face grew pale; the laugh
was hushed, and the voices died away in broken syllables; the people in
the shops crowded to the doors with a ghastly stare, and the passengers
oil all sides fled as from an embodied pestilence.  The horses reared
and snorted.  An old beggar-woman sat before St. Paul’s Church, with her
withered palm stretched out to all, but drew it back from me, and
pointed to the graves and monuments in that populous churchyard.  Three
lovely girls whom I had formerly known, ran shrieking across the street.
A personage in black, whom I was about to overtake, suddenly turned his
head and showed the features of a long-lost friend.  He gave me a look
of horror and was gone.

“I passed not one step farther, but threw my eyes on a looking-glass
which stood deep within the nearest shop.  At first glimpse of my own
figure I awoke, with a horrible sensation of self-terror and
self-loathing.  No wonder that the affrighted city fled!  I had been
promenading Broadway in my shroud!”

I should be doing injustice to my friend’s memory, were I to publish
other extracts even nearer to insanity than this, front the scarcely
legible papers before me.  I gather from them--for I do not remember
that he ever related to me the circumstances--that he once made a
journey, chiefly on foot, to Niagara.  Some conduct of the friends among
whom he resided in his native village was constructed by him into
oppression.  These were the friends to whose care he had been committed
by his parents, who died when Oberon was about twelve years of age.
Though he had always been treated by them with the most uniform
kindness, and though a favorite among the people of the village rather
on account of the sympathy which they felt in his situation than from
any merit of his own, such was the waywardness of his temper, that on
a slight provocation he ran away from the home that sheltered him,
expressing openly his determination to die sooner than return to the
detested spot.  A severe illness overtook him after he had been absent
about four months.  While ill, he felt how unsoothing were the kindest
looks and tones of strangers.  He rose from his sick-bed a better man,
and determined upon a speedy self-atonement by returning to his native
town.  There he lived, solitary and sad, but forgiven and cherished by
his friends, till the day he died.  That part of the journal which
contained a description of this journey is mostly destroyed.  Here and
there is a fragment.  I cannot select, for the pages are very scanty;
but I do not withhold the following fragments, because they indicate a
better and more cheerful frame of mind than the foregoing.

“On reaching the ferry-house, a rude structure of boards at the foot of
the cliff, I found several of those wretches devoid of poetry, and lost
some of my own poetry by contact with them.  The hut was crowded by a
party of provincials,--a simple and merry set, who had spent the
afternoon fishing near the Falls, and were bartering black and white
bass and eels for the ferryman’s whiskey.  A greyhound and three
spaniels, brutes of much more grace and decorous demeanor than their
masters, sat at the door.  A few yards off, yet wholly unnoticed by the
dogs, was a beautiful fox, whose countenance betokened all the sagacity
attributed to him in ancient fable.  He had a comfortable bed of straw
in an old barrel, whither he retreated, flourishing his bushy tail as I
made a step towards him, but soon came forth and surveyed me with a keen
and intelligent eye.  The Canadians bartered their fish and drank their
whiskey, and were loquacious on trifling subjects, and merry at simple
jests, with as little regard to the scenery as they could have to the
flattest part of the Grand Canal.  Nor was I entitled to despise them;
for I amused myself with all those foolish matters of fishermen, and
dogs, and fox, just as if Sublimity and Beauty were not married at that
place and moment; as if their nuptial band were not the brightest of all
rainbows on the opposite shore; as if the gray precipice were not
frowning above my head and Niagara thundering around me.

“The grim ferryman, a black-whiskered giant, half drunk withal, now
thrust the Canadians by main force out of his door, launched a boat, and
bade me sit in the stern-sheets.  Where we crossed the river was white
with foam, yet did not offer much resistance to a straight passage,
which brought us close to the outer edge of the American falls.  The
rainbow vanished as we neared its misty base, and when I leaped ashore,
the sun had left all Niagara in shadow.”

“A sound of merriment, sweet voices and girlish laughter, came dancing
through the solemn roar of waters.  In old times, when the French, and
afterwards the English, held garrisons near Niagara, it used to be
deemed a feat worthy of a soldier, a frontier man, or an Indian, to
cross the rapids to Goat Island.  As the country became less rude and
warlike, a long space intervened, in which it was but half believed, by
a faint and doubtful tradition, that mortal foot bad never trod this
wild spot of precipice and forest clinging between two cataracts.  The
island is no longer a tangled forest, but a grove of stately trees, with
grassy intervals about their roots and woodland paths among their
trunks.

“There was neither soldier nor Indian here now, but a vision of three
lovely girls, running brief races through the broken sunshine of the
grove, hiding behind the trees, and pelting each other with the cones of
the pine.  When their sport had brought them near me, it so happened
that one of the party ran up and shook me by the band,--a greeting which
I heartily returned, and would have done the same had it been tenderer.
I had known this wild little black-eyed lass in my youth and her
childhood, before I had commenced my rambles.

“We met on terms of freedom and kindness, which elder ladies might have
thought unsuitable with a gentleman of my description.  When I alluded
to the two fair strangers, she shouted after them by their Christian
names, at which summons, with grave dignity, they drew near, and honored
me with a distant courtesy.  They were from the upper part of Vermont.
Whether sisters, or cousins, or at all related to each other, I cannot
tell; but they are planted in my memory like ‘two twin roses on one
stem,’ with the fresh dew in both their bosoms; and when I would have
pure and pleasant thoughts, I think of them.  Neither of them could have
seen seventeen years.  They both were of a height, and that a moderate
one.  The rose-bloom of their cheeks could hardly be called bright in
her who was the rosiest, nor faint, though a shade less deep, in her
companion.  Both had delicate eyebrows, not strongly defined, yet
somewhat darker than their hair; both had small sweet mouths, maiden
mouths, of not so warns and deep a tint as ruby, but only red as the
reddest rose; each had those gems, the rarest, the most precious, a pair
of clear, soft bright blue eyes.  Their style of dress was similar; one
had on a black silk gown, with a stomacher of velvet, and scalloped
cuffs of the same from the wrist to the elbow; the other wore cuffs and
stomacher of the like pattern and material, over a gown of crimson silk.
The dress was rather heavy for their slight figures, but suited to
September.  They and the darker beauty all carried their straw bonnets
in their hands.”

I cannot better conclude these fragments than with poor Oberon’s
description of his return to his native village after his slow recovery
from his illness.  How beautifully does he express his penitential
emotions!  A beautiful moral may be indeed drawn from the early death of
a sensitive recluse, who had shunned the ordinary avenues of
distinction, and with splendid abilities sank to rest into an early
grave, almost unknown to mankind, and without any record save what my
pen hastily leaves upon these tear-blotted pages.



II.

MY HOME RETURN.

When the stage-coach had gained the summit of the hill, I alighted to
perform the small remainder of my journey on foot.  There had not been
a more delicious afternoon than this in all the train of summer, the air
being a sunny perfume, made up of balm and warmth, and gentle
brightness.  The oak and walnut trees over my head retained their deep
masses of foliage, and the grass, though for months the pasturage of
stray cattle, had been revived with the freshness of early June by the
autumnal rains of the preceding week.  The garb of autumn, indeed,
resembled that of spring.  Dandelions and butterflies were sprinkled
along the roadside like drops of brightest gold in greenest grass, and a
star-shaped little flower of blue, with a golden centre.  In a rocky
spot, and rooted under the stone walk, there was one wild rose-bush
bearing three roses very faintly tinted, but blessed with a spicy
fragrance.  The same tokens would have announced that the year was
brightening into the glow of summer.  There were violets too, though few
and pale ones.  But the breath of September was diffused through the
mild air, and became perceptible, too thrillingly for my enfeebled
frame, whenever a little breeze shook out the latent coolness.

“I was standing on the hill at the entrance of my native village, whence
I had looked back to bid farewell, and forward to the pale mist-bow that
overarched my path, and was the omen of my fortunes.  How I had
misinterpreted that augury, the ghost of hope, with none of hope’s
bright hues!  Nor could I deem that all its portents were yet
accomplished, though from the same western sky the declining sun shone
brightly in my face.  But I was calm and not depressed.  Turning to the
village, so dim and dream-like at my last view, I saw the white houses
and brick stores, the intermingled trees, the footpaths with their wide
borders of grass, and the dusty road between; all a picture of peaceful
gladness in the sunshine.

“‘Why have I never loved my home before?’ thought I, as my spirit
reposed itself on the quiet beauty of the scene.

“On the side of the opposite hill was the graveyard, sloping towards the
farther extremity of the village.  The sun shone as cheerfully there as
on the abodes of the living, and showed all the little hillocks and the
burial-stones, white marble or slate, and here and there a tomb, with
the pleasant grass about them all.  A single tree was tinged with glory
from the west, and threw a pensive shade behind.  Not far from where it
fell was the tomb of my parents, whom I had hardly thought of in bidding
adieu to the village, but had remembered them more faithfully among the
feelings that drew me homeward.  At my departure their tomb had been
hidden in the morning mist.  Beholding it in the sunshine now, I felt a
sensation through my frame as if a breeze had thrown the coolness of
September over me, though not a leaf was stirred, nor did the thistle-down
take flight.  Was I to roam no more through this beautiful world,
but only to the other end of the village?  Then let me lie down near my
parents, but not with them, because I love a green grave better than a
tomb.

“Moving slowly forward, I heard shouts and laughter, and perceived a
considerable throng of people, who came from behind the meeting-house
and made a stand in front of it.  Thither all the idlers in the village
were congregated to witness the exercises of the engine company, this
being the afternoon of their monthly practice.  They deluged the roof of
the meeting-house, till the water fell from the eaves in a broad
cascade; then the stream beat against the dusty windows like a
thunder-storm;  and sometimes they flung it up beside the steeple,
sparkling in an ascending shower about the weathercock.  For variety’s
sake the engineer made it undulate horizontally, like a great serpent
flying over the earth.  As his last effort, being roguishly inclined, he
seemed to take aim at the sky, falling short rather of which, down came
the fluid, transformed to drops of silver, on the thickest crowd of the
spectators.  Then ensued a prodigious rout and mirthful uproar, with no
little wrath of the surly ones, whom this is an infallible method of
distinguishing. The joke afforded infinite amusement to the ladies at the
windows and some old people under the hay-scales.  I also laughed at a
distance, and was glad to find myself susceptible, as of old, to the
simple mirth of such a scene.

“But the thoughts that it excited were not all mirthful.  I had
witnessed hundreds of such spectacles in my youth, and one precisely
similar only a few days before my departure.  And now, the aspect of the
village being the same, and the crowd composed of my old acquaintances,
I could hardly realize that years had passed, or even months, or that
the very drops of water were not falling at this moment, which had been
flung up then.  But I pressed the conviction home, that, brief as the
time appeared, it had been long enough for me to wander away and return
again, with my fate accomplished, and little more hope in this world.
The last throb of an adventurous and wayward spirit kept me from
repining.  I felt as if it were better, or not worse, to have compressed
my enjoyments and sufferings into a few wild years, and then to rest
myself in an early grave, than to have chosen the untroubled and
ungladdened course of the crowd before me, whose days were all alike,
and a long lifetime like each day.  But the sentiment startled me.  For
a moment I doubted whether my dear-bought wisdom were anything but the
incapacity to pursue fresh follies, and whether, if health and strength
could be restored that night, I should be found in the village after
to-morrow’s dawn.

“Among other novelties, I had noticed that the tavern was now designated
as a Temperance House, in letters extending across the whole front, with
a smaller sign promising Hot Coffee at all hours, and Spruce Beer to
lodgers gratis.  There were few new buildings, except a Methodist chapel
and a printing-office, with a bookstore in the lower story.  The golden
mortar still ornamented the apothecary’s door, nor had the Indian Chief,
with his gilded tobacco stalk, been relieved from doing sentinel’s duty
before Dominicus Pike’s grocery.  The gorgeous silks, though of later
patterns, were still flaunting like a banner in front of Mr.
Nightingale’s dry-goods store.  Some of the signs introduced me to
strangers, whose predecessors had failed, or emigrated to the West, or
removed merely to the other end of the village, transferring their names
from the sign-boards to slabs of marble or slate.  But, on the whole,
death and vicissitude had done very little.  There were old men,
scattered about the street, who had been old in my earliest
reminiscences; and, as if their venerable forms were permanent parts of
the creation, they appeared to be hale and hearty old men yet.  The less
elderly were more altered, having generally contracted a stoop, with
hair wofully thinned and whitened.  Some I could hardly recognize; at my
last glance they had been boys and girls, but were young men and women
when I looked again; and there were happy little things too, rolling
about on the grass, whom God had made since my departure.

“But now, in my lingering course I had descended the bill, and began to
consider, painfully enough, how I should meet my townspeople, and what
reception they would give me.  Of many an evil prophecy, doubtless, had
I been the subject.  And would they salute me with a roar of triumph or
a low hiss of scorn, on beholding their worst anticipations more than
accomplished?

“‘No,’ said I, ‘they will not triumph over me.  And should they ask the
cause of my return, I will tell f hem that a man may go far and tarry
long away, if his health be good and his hopes high; but that when flesh
and spirit begin to fail, he remembers his birthplace and the old
burial-ground, and hears a voice calling him to cone home to his father
and mother.  They will know, by my wasted frame and feeble step, that I
have heard the summons and obeyed.  And, the first greetings over, they
will let me walk among them unnoticed, and linger in the sunshine while
I may, and steal into my grave in peace.’

“With these reflections I looked kindly at the crowd, and drew off my
glove, ready to give my hand to the first that should put forth his.  It
occurred to me, also, that some youth among them, now at the crisis of
his fate, might have felt his bosom thrill at my example, and be emulous
of my wild life and worthless fame.  But I would save him.

“‘He shall be taught,’ said I, ‘by my life, and by my death, that the
world is a sad one for him who shrinks from its sober duties.  My
experience shall warn him to adopt some great and serious aim, such as
manhood will cling to, that he may not feel himself, too late, a
cumberer of this overladen earth, but a man among men.  I will beseech
him not to follow an eccentric path, nor, by stepping aside from the
highway of human affairs, to relinquish his claim upon human sympathy.
And often, as a text of deep and varied meaning, I will remind him that
he is an American.’

“By this time I had drawn near the meeting-house, and perceived that the
crowd were beginning to recognize me.”


These are the last words traced by his hand.  Has not so chastened a
spirit found true communion with the pure in Heaven?  “Until of late, I
never could believe that I was seriously ill: the past, I thought, could
not extend its misery beyond itself; life was restored to me, and should
not be missed again.  I had day-dreams even of wedded happiness.  Still,
as the days wear on, a faintness creeps through my frame and spirit,
recalling the consciousness that a very old man might as well nourish
hope and young desire as I at twenty-four.  Yet the consciousness of my
situation does not always make me sad.  Sometimes I look upon the world
with a quiet interest, because it cannot, concern me personally, and a
loving one for the same reason, because nothing selfish can interfere
with the sense of brotherhood.  Soon to be all spirit, I have already a
spiritual sense of human nature, and see deeply into the hearts of
mankind, discovering what is hidden from the wisest.  The loves of young
men and virgins are known to me, before the first kiss, before the
whispered word, with the birth of the first sigh.  My glance comprehends
the crowd, and penetrates the breast of the solitary man.  I think
better of the world than formerly, more generously of its virtues, more
mercifully of its faults, with a higher estimate of its present
happiness, and brighter hopes of its destiny.  My mind has put forth a
second crop of blossoms, as the trees do in the Indian summer.  No
winter will destroy their beauty, for they are fanned by the breeze and
freshened by the shower that breathes and falls in the gardens of
Paradise!”









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fragments from The Journal of a
Solitary Man, by Nathaniel Hawthorne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL OF A SOLITARY MAN ***

***** This file should be named 9247-0.txt or 9247-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/2/4/9247/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
